Vol. 266         Monday , 
No. 15  16th December, 2024 
25 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
Oath or Affirmation (page 1) 
 
Obituary References (pages 1-2) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 2-14) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers - Laid on the table (page 14) 
 
Statements of the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers- Laid on the table (pages 15-16) 
 
Statements of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel- Laid on the table (pages 16-17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Reports of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution - Laid on the table (page 17) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Labour, 
Textiles and Skill Development - Laid on the table (pages 17-18) 
 
Leave of Absence- Granted (page 18) 
 
Observations by the Chair (pages 18-19) 
  
Discussion on the "Glorious Journey of 75 Y ears of the Constitution of India" -Not 
Concluded (pages 19-41 and pages 41-169) 
 
Announcement by the Chair (page 41) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
   ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
 https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 16th December, 2024 /  25 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
OATH OR AFFIRMATION 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, a very pleasant occasion; Oath or affirmation. 
Shri Sana Sathish Babu (Andhra Pradesh)  
Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha (Andhra Pradesh)  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir,* 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This will not go on record.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, only 
the text of the oath spoken will go on record.  
Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah (Andhra Pradesh) 
Shrimati Rekha Sharma (Haryana) 
Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha) 
Shri Ritabrata Banerjee (West Bengal).  
OBITUARY REFERENCES 
MR. CHAIRMAN: 
Hon. Members, I refer with profound sorrow to the passing away of 
former Members of this august House - Shri Shreegopal Vyas and Dr. K. Malaisamy.  
Shri Shreegopal Vyas  passed away on the 7 th of November, 2024. He served as a 
Member of this House representing the St ate of Chhattisgarh, from 2006 to 2012. 
Born on 15 th February, 1932, in Nagaur District of Rajasthan, Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
was an Electrical Engineer by profession and played a key role in the expansion of 
Bhilai Steel Plant, Chhattisgarh. He also pr acticed as an Advocate for a brief time at 
Raipur.  
* Not reco rded

 
 
  Shri Vyas is also remembered for his contributions to the scholarly world 
through his numerous articles as well as the well-received book ‘Sansad Ke Jharokhe 
Se’, published in 2010. 
In the passing away of Sh ri Shreegopal Vyas, the co untry has lost a passionate 
engineer, a prolific writer and an able parliamentarian. 
  Dr. K. Malaisamy  passed away on the 6 th of November, 2024. He served as a 
Member of this House representing the State of Tamil Nadu from 2004 to 2010. 
  Born on 1 st June, 1937, in Sivaganga District  of Tamil Nadu, Shri Malaisamy 
served in the prestigious Indian Administra tive Service for over  three decades and 
held several important offices including that of Home Secr etary, Government of Tamil 
Nadu and State Election Commissioner of Tamil Nadu. Shri Malaisamy also served as 
a Member of the Thirteenth Lok Sabha (1 999-2004). Known for his oratorical skills, 
Shri Malaisamy’s speeches were well r eceived and highly praised so is his 
contribution to Tamil literature. He has also authored a few books. 
  In the passing away of Dr. K. Malaisamy, the country has lost an able 
administrator, an excellent orator and an able parliamentarian. 
We deeply mourn the passing away of Shri Shreegopal Vyas and Dr. K. Malaisamy. I 
request hon. Members to rise in their places and observe silence as a mark of respect 
to the departed souls.  
 
(Hon. Members then stood in silence for one minute.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Secretary-General will convey to the members of the bereaved 
families our sense of profound sorrow and deep sympathy.  
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Papers to be laid on the Table.   Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu.  
Soothing name!  
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU) : Thank 
you, Sir.  In fact, the other day, I was just mentioning about Kinjarapu only.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu, right! 
 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Yes, Sir. Perfect. Thank you. 
Report and Accounts (2023-24) of AAI, New Delhi and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU):  Sir, I 
lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (4) of Section 28 and sub-section (2) of Section 29 of the Airports Authority 
of India Act, 1994: - 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ai rports Authority ofIndia (AAI),
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report on
the Accounts.
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report.
Notifications of the Ministry of Power 
जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी राज भूषण चौधरी ): महोदय, मȅ Ǜी Ǜीपाद यसो नाईक की 
ओर से िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
 A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Power, under Section 179 of the Electricity Act, 2003: - 
(1) No. JERC – 32/2024., dated the 20 th November, 2024, publishing the
Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission for the State of Goa and
Union Territories (Generation, Transmission and Distribution Multi
Year Tariff) Regulations, 2024.
(2) No. JERC–33/2024., dated the 20 th November, 2024, publishing the
Joint Electricity Regulatory Commi ssion (Terms and Conditions for
Tariff determination from Renewa ble Energy Sources) Regulations,
2024.
Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of various Institutes and Centres and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS; AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU):  Sir, on behalf of my colleague,  Sushri Shobha 
Karandlaje, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following 
papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Mahatma Gandhi Institute for
Rural Industrialization (MGIRI), Wa rdha, Maharashtra, for the year 
2023-24. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
3

 
 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Imphal, Manipur, for the year 2023- 24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Baddi, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, fo r the year 2023-24, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the ye ar 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(v) (a) Thirty-second Annual Report and A ccounts of the Central Tool Room 
and Training Centre(CTTC), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indo Danish Tool Room (IDTR), 
Jamshedpur, Jharkhand, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(vii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Tool Room & Training 
Centre (CTTC), Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(viii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Tool Room and Training Centre 
(TRTC), Guwahati, Assam, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(ix) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indo German Tool Room 
(IGTR),Aurangabad,Maharashtra,for the year 2023-24,together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(x) (a) Thirty-second Annual Report and Ac counts of the Indo German Tool 
Room(IGTR), Indore, Madhya Pr adesh, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(xi) (a) Thirty-second Annual Report and Accounts of the Indo German Tool 
Room (IGTR), Ahmedabad, Gujarat,  for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Tool Room (CTR), 
Ludhiana, Punjab, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xiii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Institute of Hand Tools 
(CIHT), Jalandhar, Punjab, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xiv) (a) Fifty-fourth Annual Report an d Accounts of the Central Institute of 
Tool Design (CITD), Hyderabad, Telangana, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Institute for Design of Electrical 
Measuring Instruments (IDEMI), Mu mbai, Maharashtra, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xvi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Electronics Service & Training 
Centre (ESTC), Ramnagar, Uttarakhand, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xvii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Process and Product 
development Centre (PPDC), Agra, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023-
24,together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xviii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Process cum Product 
Development Centre (PPDC), Meerut , Uttar Pradesh, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xix) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for the Development of 
Glass Industry (CDGI), Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023- 
24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xx) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Fragrance and Flavour 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
5

 
 
Development Centre (FFDC), Kannauj , Uttar Pradesh, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Footwear Training Institute 
(CFTI), Agra, Uttar Pradesh, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Footwear Training Institute 
(CFTI), Chennai, Tamil Nadu, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxiii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Bhiwadi, Rajasthan, for the year 202 3-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxiv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Pudi, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxvi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Puducherry, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxvii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Rohtak, Haryana, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(xxviii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the   MSME- Technology Centre, 
Sitarganj, Uttarakhand, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(xxix) (a) Twenty-fourth Annual Report and Accounts of the Credit Guarantee 
Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 
I.Notifications of the Ministry of Mines 
II. Reports and Accounts (2022-23 and 2023-24) of various Companies and Institutes 
and related papers 
III. Reports  and Accounts (2023-24) of JNARDDC, Nagpur, Maharashtra; NIRM, 
Bengaluru, Karnataka; CMPFO, Dhanbad, Jharkhand and and related papers 
 
कोयला मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा खान मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे): महोदय, 
मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Mines, under sub-section (1 ) of Section 28 of the Mine s and Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1957: - 
 (1) S.O. 5066(E)., dated the 26
th November, 2024, notifying M/s APC 
Drilling & Construction Private Limited and M/s Vardan Environet LLP 
under "Category ‘A’ Exploration Agencies". 
 (2) S.O. 5069(E)., dated the 26 th November, 2024, notifying the Synergy 
Geotech Private Limited under"Category ‘A’ Exploration Agencies". 
II. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Fifty-first Annual Report   and Accounts of the Mineral Exploration and 
Consultancy Limited (MECL), Nagpur, Maharashtra, for the year 
2022-23, together with the Auditor' s Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(ii) (a) Fifty-second Annual Report   and Accounts of the Mineral Exploration 
and Consultancy Limited (MECL), Na gpur, Maharashtra, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor' s Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(iii) (a) Fifty-second Annual Report an d Accounts of the Bharat Gold Mines 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
7

 
 
Limited (BGML), Kolar, Karnataka,  for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) (i) above. 
III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development and Design  Centre (JNARDDC), Nagpur, 
Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Rock 
Mechanics (NIRM), Bengaluru, Ka rnataka, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
   (iii)      A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Organization (CMPFO), Dhanbad, Jharkhand, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Organization. 
 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Defence 
II.Reports and Accounts (2022-23 and 2023-24) of BEML, Bengaluru, Karnataka; HAL, 
Bengaluru, Karnataka and BEML Land Assets Li mited, Bengaluru, Karnataka and 
related papers 
III.Annual Administration Report s (2023-24) of the Cantonm ent Boards, New Delhi;  
IV. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of CENJOWS, New Delhi and NMF, New Delhi 
and related papers 
V. Memoranda of Understanding (2024-25)  between the Governm ent of India and 
BEML Limited, Bengaluru and between the Government of India and HAL, Bengaluru. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF DEFENCE (SHRI SANJAY SETH) :  
Sir, I lay on the Table—   
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Defence, framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India:- 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 (1) S.R.O. 72., dated the May 28 – June 3, 2023 (Weekly Gazette), 
publishing the Defence Research and Development Service Rules, 
2023, along with delay statement.  
 (2) S.R.O. 75., dated the June 4 – June 10, 2023 (Weekly Gazette), 
publishing the Ministry of De fence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Civil Wo rks Officer Cadre (Group 'A' and 
'B' Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2023, along with delay statement. 
 (3) S.R.O. 78., dated the June 18 – June 24, 2023 (Weekly Gazette), 
publishing the Ministry of De fence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Store Assistant ‘B’ and Store Assistant ‘A’ 
(Group ‘C’ Posts)  Recruitmen t (Amendment) Rules, 2023, along 
with delay statement. 
 (4) S.R.O. 85., dated the August 20 – August 26, 2023 (Weekly 
Gazette), publishing the Ministry of Defence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Senior Store Officer Grade II, Store Officer 
and Senior Store Assistant (Group  ‘A’ and ‘B’ Posts) Recruitment 
Rules, 2023, along with delay statement. 
 (5) S.R.O. 86., dated the Septem ber 24 – September 30, 2023 (Weekly 
Gazette), publishing the Defence Research and Development 
Organisation, Ministry of Defence, Group ‘C’ posts Recruitment 
(Amendment) Rules, 2023, along with delay statement. 
 (6) S.R.O. 90., dated the Decembe r 24 – December 30, 2023 (Weekly 
Gazette), publishing the Ministry of Defence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Deputy Director (Official Language), 
Group ‘A’ Post, Recruitment Rules, 2023, along with delay statement. 
 (7) S.R.O. 9., dated the Februa ry 4 – February 10, 2024 (Weekly 
Gazette), publishing the Ministry of Defence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation and Dir ectorate General of Aeronautical 
Quality Assurance, Accounts Cadre, Accountant (Group ‘B’ Post) 
Recruitment Rules, 2024, along with delay statement. 
 (8) S.R.O. 10., dated the Febr uary 4 – February 10, 2024 (Weekly 
Gazette), publishing the Ministry of Defence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation and Dir ectorate General of Aeronautical 
Quality Assurance, Accounts Cadre,  Senior Accounts Officer Grade-I 
(Group ‘A’ Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024, along with delay 
statement. 
 (9) S.R.O. 24., dated the 1
st June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
9

 
 
Defence, Defence Research and De velopment Organisation, Senior 
Administrative Officer Grade-II (Gro up ‘A’ Post) Recruitment Rules, 
2024, along with delay statement. 
 (10) S.R.O. 25., dated the 1 st June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of 
Defence, Defence Research and Development Organisation, Principal 
Private Secretary Recruitment (Ame ndment) Rules, 2024, along with 
delay statement. 
 (11) S.R.O. 52., dated the Septem ber 15 – September 21, 2024 (Weekly 
Gazette), publishing the Ministry of Defence, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation Technical Cadre Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 II. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section  
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Sixtieth Annual Report and Accounts of the Bharat Earth Movers 
Limited (BEML), Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on  the working of the Company. 
(ii) (a) Sixty-first Annual Report and Accounts of the Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited (HAL), Bengaluru, Karnatak a, for the year 2023-24, together 
with   the Auditor's  Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(iii) (a) 
Third Annual   Report   and   Accounts   of   the    BEML Land Assets 
Limited, Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, together with  
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(iv) (a) Second Annual   Report   and   Accounts   of   the    BEML Land 
Assets Limited, Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2022-23, together 
with   the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) (iv) above. 
 III.
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Administration Reports of the Cantonment Boards, New Delhi, 
for the year 2023-24. 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
IV.(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ce ntre for Joint Warfare Studies 
(CENJOWS), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
   (ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of National Maritime Foundation (NMF), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Foundation. 
V.A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 (a) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Department of Defence Production , Ministry of Defence) and the 
BEML Limited, Bengaluru, for the year 2024-25. 
 (b) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Department of Defence Production , Ministry of Defence) and the 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL),  Bengaluru, for the year 2024-
25. 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
II. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of HUDCO, Ne w Delhi and KMRL, Kochi, Kerala 
and related papers 
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी तोख
न साहू): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् 
सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
I.A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, under sub-s ection (2) of Section 32 of the Metro 
Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978: - 
(a) (1) S.O. 3587., dated the 23 rd August, 2024, notifying the alignment of 
Bhopal Metro Rail Project. 
 (2) S.O. 3588 (E)., dated the 23 rd August, 2024, notifying the alignment 
of Indore Metro Rail Project. 
 (3) S.O 4018(E)., dated the 19 th September, 2024, renaming of some of 
the metro stations of Mumbai Metro Line-3 project. 
(b) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
11

 
 
Notification No. G.S.R. 738(E)., dated the 29th November, 2024, publishing the Delhi 
Development Authority, Multi-Tasking Staf f (Group ‘C’ Post) Recruitment Rules, 
2024, under Section 58 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957. 
 
II.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Fifty-fourth Annual Report an d Accounts of the Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation Limited (HUDCO), New Delhi, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor' s Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
(ii) (a) 
Thirteenth Annual Report and Acco unts of the Kochi Metro Rail 
Limited (KMRL), Kochi, Kerala, for the year 2023-24, together with  
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
 
I.Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of NDSA,  New Delhi; the Brahmaputra Board, 
Guwahati, Assam and related papers 
II.Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of the National Water Development Agency, New 
Delhi; NMCG, New Delhi and NERIWALM, Tezpur, Assam and related papers 
 
जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी रा
ज भूषण चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
I.(i).   A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under sub-section 
(3) of Section 45 of the Dam Safety Act, 2021: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA), New 
Delhi, for the year 2023-24.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Authority. 
(ii). A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following papers, under Section 21 of 
the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati, 
Assam, for the year 2023-24, togeth er with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Board. 
 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 II.A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Water Development 
Agency, New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Agency. 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), New 
Delhi, for the year 2023-24.     
 (b) Annual Accounts of the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.     
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Mission. 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the North Eastern Regional Institute of 
Water and Land Management (NER IWALM), Tezpur, Assam, for the 
year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 
Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of the AI Assets Holding Limited, New Delhi and 
AERA, New Delhi and related papers 
 
नागर िवमानन मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी मुरलीध
र मोहोल) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
 
(i) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Fifth Annual Report and Accounts of the AI Assets Holding Limited, 
New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, togeth er with   the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(4) of Section 35 and sub- section (3) of Section 36 of the Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority Act, 2008:- 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India (AERA), New Delh i, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
13

 
 
 
कोयला मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा खान मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे) : महोदय, 
मȅ Ǜी पंकज चौधरी की ओर से िनयंतर्क और महालेखापरीक्षक (कǄर्Ëय, शिƪयां तथा सेवा की 
शतȄ) अिधिनयम, 1971 की धारा 19 क क े खंड (2) क े अधीन माचर्, 2022 को समाÃत अविध क े 
िलए – संघ सरकार (वािणिज्यक) 2024 का संख्यांक 12 (अनुपालन लेखापरीक्षा िटÃपिणयां) क े 
संबंध मȂ भारत क े िनयंतर्क और महालेखापरीक्षक क े Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) 
सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH (BIHAR) :  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Chemicals (2024- 25):- 
 
 (i) First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contai ned in its Forty-sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Insect icides & Pesticides – promotion 
and development including safe usage-  licensing regime for insecticides 
pertaining to the Department of Ch emicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers; 
 (ii) Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations cont ained in its Fiftieth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Promotion of Medical Device Industry’ 
pertaining to the Department of Pharmaceutical, Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers; 
 (iii) Third Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers; 
 (iv) Fourth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals; and 
 (v) Fifth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
 
Report (year ending 31st March, 2022) of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH (BIHAR) :  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the Statements show ing Final Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the following Action Taken Reports of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2024-25):- 
 (i) Action Taken Statement on Forty-sevent h Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-ninth Re port (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘NANO fertilizers for sustainable crop  production and maintaining soil 
health’ of the Department of Fertilizers; 
 (ii) Action Taken Statement on Forty-eighth Report on action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Fortieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Department of Fertilizers; 
 (iii) 
Action Taken Statement on Fifty-first Report on action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-first Repo rt (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of  the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals; 
 (iv) 
Action Taken Statement on Forty-fift h Report on action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Department of Pharmaceuticals; 
 (v) Action Taken Statement on Fifty-second Report on action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Planning for fertilizers production and import policy on fertilizers including 
GST and import duty thereon’ of the Department of Fertilizers; and 
 (vi) 
Action Taken Statement on Forty-nint h Report on action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-fourth Re port (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Fertilizers Subsidy Policy and Pricing Matters including need to continue 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
15

 
 
Urea Subsidy Scheme’ of the Department of Fertilizers. 
 
 
STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
 
SHRI DEEPAK PRAKASH (JHARKHAND) :  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the St atements showing Final Acti on Taken on the following 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel:- 
 
 (i) Thirty-second Report (Seventeenth Lo k Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Twenty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants 
(2022-23)" pertaining to the Ministry of Steel; 
 (ii) Thirty-third Report (Seventeenth Lo k Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Twenty-ninth Report  (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants 
(2022-23)" pertaining to the Ministry of Mines; 
 (iii) 
Thirty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Thirtieth Report  (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants 
(2022-23)" pertaining to the Ministry of Coal; 
 (iv) Thirty-fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty-
first Report   (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Development of 
Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country" pertaining to the 
Ministry of Mines; 
 (v) Forty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Skill 
Development in Steel Sector" pertaining to the Ministry of Steel; 
 (vi) Forty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Import 
of Coal –Trends and Issue of Self Reliance" pertaining to the Ministry of 
Coal; 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 (vii) Forty-third Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/R ecommendations contained in the 
Thirty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)”pertaining to the Ministry of Coal;  
 (viii) Forty-fourth  Report (Seventeen th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/R ecommendations contained in the 
Thirty-ninth Report (Seven teenth  Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)”pertaining to the Ministry of Mines; and 
 (ix) Forty-fifth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Fortieth  Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2023-
24)” pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.  
 
                                                               
 
 REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन  (छǄीसगढ़): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और 
सावर्जिनक िवतरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित 
(अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूं :- 
 
(i) 
Fifth Report of on ‘Demands for Gran ts (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs); and 
 
(ii) Sixth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distributi on (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल ( उǄराखंड: महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत Ǜम, वÎतर् और कौशल िवकास 
संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा 
िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
17

 
 
(i)First Report on ‘Demands for Grants  (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment; 
(ii)Second Report on ‘Demands for Gr ants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Textiles; and 
(iii)Third Report on ‘Demands for Gran ts (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship.    
 
  
LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Hon. Members, I have to inform that a communication has been 
received from hon. Member, Shri Shibu Soren,  stating that he is unable to attend the 
sittings of the current (266th) Session of the Rajya Sabha from 25th November to 20th 
December 2024 on medical grounds.  
Does he have the permission of the House for remaining absent from 25th 
November to 20th December 2024 during the current (266 th) Session of the Rajya 
Sabha?  
 
(No hon. Member dissented) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Permission to remain absent is granted. We wish him a speedy 
recovery.  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I have received two notices under Rule 267. As the 
House has already decided that these two da ys will be devoted for discussion on the 
Constitution, I appeal to the hon. Members not to press them.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: I withdraw my notice, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Thank you! Hon. Members, today we commence a two-day 
commemoration of a defining moment in our nation's history, the 75th Anniversary of 
our Constitution's adoption on 26 November 1949. This milestone invites us not to just 
celebrate, but to deeply reflect on our journey and chart our path forward.  
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
This Constitution has been the bedr ock of the world's largest democracy, 
testament to the profound wisdom of it s architects and the resilience of our 
democratic spirit.  
Let our deliberations in this House, over the next two days, reflect the 
gravity of this occasion. May our discu ssions strengthen the bond between our 
Parliamentary institutions that seek to serve 1.4 billion people, fructifying their 
expectations and aspirations. 
 As we look ahead to 2047, when  India marks the Centenary of its 
Independence, let our debates illuminate th e path forward towards our vision of Viksit 
Bharat.  
Hon. Members, time will not be a constraint. In the Lok Sabha, the debate was 
fructifying in terms of time  as well. I will accommodate as many speakers as may be 
keen to contribute. And, towards that, we will be increasing the time. I will report that 
at 2 PM today. 
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE "GLORIOUS JOURNEY OF 75 YEARS OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA" 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now, Srimati Nirmala Sitharaman to raise the discussion on the 
Glorious Journey of 75 Years of the Constitution of India.  
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN) :  Mr.  Chairman, Sir, let me first start by 
thanking the hon'ble Prime Minister, the L eader of the House, Shri Jagat Prakash 
Nadda, my party, and yourself, the hon. Chai rman, for giving me this opportunity to 
take part in this discussion, marking the historic occasion of 75 years of our 
Constitution. I feel very honoured and equall y I feel humbled that this opportunity has 
been given to me. I thank the entire House and seek your indulgence if I come up with 
some thoughts, that I would like to share here, on which any Member could have a 
difference of opinion.  But I will start ag ain by paying homage to all the 389 Members 
of the Constituent Assembly, in particular, the 15 women Members who, in less than 
three years, together took up the ardu ous challenge and prepared, in a very 
challenging environment, the Constitution fo r India, which has stood the test of time. 
And, till today, we are extremely proud of the way India's democracy is growing.  
 As we mark the 75
th year of our Constitution, it  is time, I wo uld think, to 
reaffirm our commitment to build India, that is Bharat, that shall uphold the spirit 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
19

 
 
enshrined in this sacred document.  So with those words, I get into telling about the 
journey, that these 75 years have seen, of  our Indian Constitution, and also to say 
why India's Constitution and India today stan ds out in a very separate league of its 
own. Sir, let me just remind, and I am su re very many Members of this House will 
know, that post-Second World War, nearly  50 countries, in fact, over 50 countries, 
had become independent and they had their Constitutions  written, but many have 
changed their Constitutions, not just amen ded them but literally changed the entire 
feature of their Constitutions. But our Cons titution has stood the test of time, of 
course, yielded itself to very many amendm ents and here, therefore, I would like to 
have a few words of what Constitution India Expert, Dr. Subash Kashyap, had to say. 
"While many Constitutions of nations fr amed after the Second World War have 
floundered and gone into oblivion, our Co nstitution has successfully faced many 
crises and survived.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
This itself is evidence of its resilience, dy namism and growth potential."  Now India's 
experience has shown that our Constitution remains robust, yielding to several 
amendments, as I said, which were the need  of the hour.   And Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, 
the Chairman of the Drafting Committee, ha d said, and I quote:  "I feel, however 
good a Constitution may be, it is sure to turn out bad if those who are called to work it 
happen to be a bad lot.  And, however bad a Constitution may be, it may turn out to 
be good if those who are called to work it  happen to be a good lot." These are words 
of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Sir.  And in this  background, therefor e, with those words 
right afresh in our mind, I would like to discuss about how in the last seven decades, 
the living document, that our Constitution is, has faced very many amendments. And, 
while looking at those amendments, I would like  to have a touchstone of four different 
elements. One, that the social intent behind any amendment has been genuine, and, 
therefore, the outcome has been genuine!   That is one test.  I would like to place any 
amendment on the testing board.   Second, I would like to see if the economic intent 
and the economic outcome of any constitu tional amendment has, actually, been 
bona fide and the outcome has helped the society at large. Third, I would like to test it 
on the ground of process adopted for it, for the amendment itse lf. And fourth, the 
constitutional spirit behind such an am endment.  Now, if an amendment can go 
through these kinds of tests, we will be able to see how India's Constitution is, going 
by the words of Dr. Ambedkar, where he  said, If you had good people who are 
called to work on it, it gives good outcomes ; if you have bad pe ople who are brought 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
to work on it, it happens to give such ou tcomes which are disgust. So, if I move to 
talking about those amendments which have gone through these four tests, we will be 
able to see how the intent and the outcomes are justifiable and people in the history 
books do write about them.  
 Sequentially, because it is the first-ever Amendment, I would like to take about 
the Constitution (First Amendment) Act of 1951. Sir, it has been said, and the hon. 
Prime Minister, while talking in the Lok Sabha also referred to the fact that there was 
an Interim Government in place between August 15
th, 1947 -- the Interim Government 
was there before that as well -- and it la sted till 17th April, 1952, post which an 
elected Government took over the charge. But during 1951, when the Constitution 
(First Amendment) Act was passed, it was an interim Government and not an elected 
Government of Government of India post 1947. Now, this was enacted, therefore, 
within a year of the commencement of the Co nstitution. It is worth remembering. In 
fact, on the issues related to the Amendment or which triggered the Amendment itself 
is the ‘freedom of speech and expression .’ The Amendment added three more heads 
to Article 19(2), saying public order could be a cause to restri ct freedom of speech; 
friendly relations with foreign States coul d be a cause to restrict freedom of speech; 
or, incitement to an offence could also  be a cause. These we re the Amendments 
brought in the first constitutional amendment. Sir, the Supreme Court of India, even in 
1950, one year before this  Amendment, had passed two landmark judgements that 
paved the way for freedom of Press under Article 19(1)(a). The Supreme Court had 
ruled in favour of the Communist magazine ‘Crossroads’ and the RSS's organisational 
magazine ‘Organiser.’ The Supreme Court had ruled in favour of them in 1950. Many 
High Courts also upheld the freedom of expression of our citizens and ruled in their 
favour. But, in response, the Interim Govern ment thought that there was a need for a 
first constitutional amendment, and that was brought in by the INC, and it was 
essentially to curb the freedom. So India, a democratic country, which prides itself 
even today about freedom of expression, saw the first Interim Government coming up 
with a constitutional amendment, which was to curb the freedom of speech of 
Indians, and that was within one year of ad option of the Constitution. So, let me say, 
Sir, that it is because the first Prime Minister of this country deplored Press scrutiny of 
his Government even as he publicly praised freedom of the Press. There was no 
doubt about it; and he had scrutinized the Amending Bill himself before approving its 
introduction in the Parliament. In the Parlia ment, it didn't go through smoothly at all. 
The voices which spoke about it, I will also refer to some of the observations made by 
eminent Members who opposed it vehement ly. Shri Syama Prasad Mookerjee said, 
and I am quoting, Sir, "You can pass a law and say that th e entire task of framing, 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
21

 
 
interpreting and working the Constitution w ill be left in the hands of Pt. Jawaharlal 
Nehru assisted by such people  whom he may desire to consult." I would think it was 
a snide remark saying, "Oh, you do it all yourself with the people who you choose to 
have and not with the approval of the Par liament." That was the extent to which Dr. 
Syama Prasad Mookerjee was upset about this Amendment.  Sir, Dr. Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee also said, "You are treating this  Constitution as a scrap of paper. You 
have declared Preamble of your Constituti on that you have done something unheard 
o f  i n  h i s t o r y ,  t h a t  w i t h i n  s o  s h o r t  a  p e r i o d  o f  a t t a i n m e n t  o f  f r e e d o m ,  - -  y o u  h a d  
trusted the people of this country to draf t a Constitution, you had given a charter of 
rights to them -- now you come forward and stab them in the back. You are not 
working for the benefit of the present generation, but for party ends." 
 Sir, Shri Kameshwar Singh, a Member of the Constituent Assembly, also had a 
lot of comments to make and he said, "This Parliament, again, is a provisional one 
and it cannot be said to be reflecting the will of the people in the way Constitution 
wants Parliament to reflect it.  For a Govern ment or a Parliament of this kind, it is 
highly improper to make such fundamen tal changes in the Constitution without 
making any reference to public opinion and, that too, at the fag end of the strenuous 
parliamentary session and almost on the ev e of a General Election."  So, scathing 
remarks were made and, despite these re marks, Prime Minister Nehru went ahead 
with the Amendment.  Shri Kameshwar Sing h, again, goes about to say, "Do they 
not show utter disregard to the Constitution  when they attempt to amend it simply 
because some of the laws are being critic ized and found invalid by the Judiciary?" 
Today we hear comments from the Indian  National Congress about how the current 
Government is questioning the Judiciary.  This comment, coming from a Member of 
the Constituent Assembly itself, was made  prior to the firs t Amendment to the 
Constitution, which curtailed freedom of ex pression.  Shri Kameshwar Singh further 
said, "The Prime Minister, I am constrained to say, is creating a bad precedent by 
sowing the seed of executive despotism and playing with the supremacy of the 
Constitution for party advantages."  So, there was no doubt that this Amendment 
was more raised for the sake of the party or the Prime Minister and the Government’s 
image rather than assuring what the Co nstituent Assembly had suggested as the 
Constitution, which was going to be adopted.   An Amendment Bill, that is, The Press 
(Objectionable Matter) Act, was passed on 23
rd October, 1951.  We know, therefore, 
the four tests for an Amendment that I was talking about, namely, social impact and 
intent, economic impact and intent, constitu tional spirit and process adopted for the 
Amendment, all were questionable.  Neve rtheless, that Amendment was undertaken 
and we heard how that Amendment, till toda y, affects the freedom of speech of this 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
country.  Now, it is not as if this 1951 Am endment happened all of a sudden.  Prior to 
the Amendment and post the Amendment, we have had recorded action taken by 
that particular Government in curtailing the Freedom of Speech.  The Act was just 
waiting to happen because even before that, they started it and even, after that, they 
were continuing. What are the examples, Si r?  Majrooh Sultanpuri and Balraj Sahni 
were both jailed in 1949 itself. For what  mistake? During one of the meetings 
organized for the mill workers in 1949, Majr ooh Sultanpuri recited a poem that was 
written against Jawaharlal Nehru and, theref o r e ,  h e  h a d  t o  g o  t o  t h e  j a i l .   S i r ,  h e  
refused to render an apology for the same and was jailed, theref ore, in 1949 along 
with Balraj Sahni, an eminent actor of those da ys.  So, that is the level of tolerance!  
Today, we go about holding the Constitution  in our hand, talk about freedom of 
speech and say, ‘there is a sense of fear in  the country’!  Did Majrooh Sultanpuri not 
feel it?  Did Balraj Sahni not feel it?  But history repeats when it comes to the 
Congress Party.  Sir, Congress’s record of curtailing freedom of speech didn’t 
confine itself to these two people.  ‘Nehru  - A Political Biography’, which was written 
by Michael Edwards in 1975, was banne d.  They also banned a film called Kissa Kursi 
Ka in 1975, which was directed by Amritlal Nahata, just because it questioned Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi and her son, also the Information and Broadcasting Minister 
then. 
 They banned also John Dalvi's book, "H imalayan Blunder", because it spoke 
about some huge crushing military disaster wh ich happened in 1962 in the China war.  
The details shouldn't come out and, therefor e, they banned that book as well. And a 
bit later, in 1988, Salman Rushdie's book , "Satanic Verses", was also banned. So, 
the spree of curtailing the freedom of expre ssion, the spree of containing freedom of 
Press, has happened before 1949, and duri ng 1949 and 1950 – in 1951, the Act 
comes up – and, subsequently also, it conti nued.  So, it is nothing new. The second 
issue that I would like to draw your attention is this. I said, I am putting it through four 
tests. The Ninth Schedule was brought in through the Constitution (First) 
Amendment Act. The Ninth Schedule is an interesting innovation brought for 
bypassing judicial review. Why was it brought in? I am questioning the intent.  The 
constitutional spirit, which was not resp ected, and the process which was adopted 
are part of the tests I want every amendment to be put, so that you know whether it is 
done with the national interest or it is done with some economic, public good, or if it 
is brought in because there is a social large good which is required to be obtained. 
No; the Ninth Schedule was brought in only  because they wanted to bypass judicial 
scrutiny.  Any Act incorporated in the Ni nth Schedule became fu lly protected against 
any challenge in any court of law und er any Fundamental Right. Today, about 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
23

 
 
everything retrospective we talk, you say, "No; nothing can happen in retrospect; it 
has to be futuristic." So, it has to be pros pective whether it is taxation, whether it is 
benefits or whether it is any clarificatory note. But here we go!  The Act declared 
invalid by the court becomes valid retrospectively after being incorporated into the 
Ninth Schedule! That is the extent to which they went so that they can bypass judicial 
scrutiny. And the Congress speaks about protecting rights and judicial 
independence! It is shocking. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)...अच्छी िडबेट चल 
रही है।  आप सुिनए।  जब आपका समय आएगा, तब बोिलएगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। अच्छी 
िडबेट चल रही है।  आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : SC, ST, OBC, come on! 
...(Interruptions)...People who sat over Kalelkar... ...(Interruptions)...The next 
instance which I would like to put it through is Amendment being enacted and the 
judiciary held in contempt.  There had to be committed judiciary; or else, they were 
not respected at all. Another example, co nstitutional amendment was brought in to 
nullify a judgement that arose in the case of  Mrs. Indira Gandhi versus Raj Narain, 
wherein the order of the Allahabad High Co urt setting aside the election of Indira 
Gandhi was challenged.  So, during the pendency of this case in the Supreme Court, 
the Congress Party enacted the 39th Constitu tion Amendment Act in 1975. Earlier, 
Supreme Court and many other High Courts have given clearance, but even then they 
curbed freedom of speech in 1951 through the First Amendment. Here, Mrs. Indira 
Gandhi's case is being heard in the Allahabad High Court. "But no, we are in a hurry. 
What if the Court co
mes against me? So, I come up with the 39th Constitution 
Amendment Act, 1975." Again, valid retrospectively, which added Article 392A to the 
Constitution. What did it say? It said, "E lections to the Presid ent, Vice President, 
Prime Minister and Lok Sabha Speaker cannot be challenged in any court in the 
country and it can be done only before a parliamentary committee." Imagine the 
extent to which they went for a person to save her chair, इसीिलए " िकÎसा क ुसीर् का" 
was banned.  
 क ुसीर् बचाने क े िलए कोटर् का verdict आने से पहले ही पािर्लयामȂट मȂ कानून मȂ अमȂडमȂट 
िकया गया।  इस तरह से कानून का दुरुपयोग  करना, constitutional amendment करवाना देश 
क े िहत मȂ नह
ीं  होता है।  इसमȂ Ģोसेस सही नहीं होता है।  इससे क ु छ भी आिर्थक या सामािजक 
सुधार नहीं होने वाला है।  Ëयिƪगत  और पिरवारवाद क े िलए ही यह अमȂडमȂट हुआ।   
सर, मȅ एक दूसरा उदाहरण देना चाहती हूँ, वह यह है िक अगर सामािजक सुधार क े िलए 
कोटर् से एक ऑडर्र आता है, तो उसके  िखलाफ हाउस मȂ कानून मȂ अमȂडमȂट िकया जाता है, 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
क्यȗिक वह उनकी राजनीित क े िलए उिचत नहीं था।  सामािजक न्याय िदलाने वाले कोटर् क े 
आदेश क े िखलाफ हाउस मȂ कानून मȂ अमȂडमȂट िकया जाता है।   इसका सबसे बिढ़या उदाहरण 
शाहबानो क े स है।  सुĢीम कोटर् ǎारा उस मिहला को न्याय िद लाने क े िलए, alimony िदलाने क े 
िलए, divorce क े बाद जो पैसा िमलना चािहए, वह िदलाने क े िलए कोटर् से आदेश आया, but the 
Congress Party passed the Muslim Women (P rotection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 
1986, which denied -- it is very important -- the Muslim women their right to alimony, 
मिहला को सामािजक न्याय नहीं िमलना चािहए, चाहे उसके  िलए कोटर् से आदेश आए या कहीं से 
भी आदेश आए, उसको कानून मȂ अमȂडमȂट क े माध्
यम से नकार िदया जाता है।  हमारी पाटीर् ने 
मिहला सÇमान क े िलए 'नारी शिƪ वंदन अिधिनयम' लाया।  इस सदन मȂ जो पहला कानून पास 
हुआ, that was regarding reservation for wome n, whereas the small benefit, that a 
divorced Muslim woman would have got, was also defeated by this Act - the 
constitutional Amendment which the Congress Party brought in 1986.  So, looking at 
my test again, I would say it was neither सामािजक न्याय, nor आिर्थक सामािजक, nor the 
process, nor the constitutional spirit.  Nothing of these was respected, and each 
time, the Congress brazenly, only to help th e family, the dynasty, kept amending the 
Constitution and this is how far they went, even if it affected any particular woman 
who desperately needed the benefit. 
Sir, I will again come to one more impo rtant event, the Emergency, where that 
one important touchstone, the process, was completely violated.  On 18 th December, 
1976, the then President gave his assent to the Constitution 42 nd Amendment Act.  
During the Emergency, when the term of the Lok Sabha was extended without proper 
justification, they invoked the law to say th at the Parliament had to be in session for 
five years, but they needed to have on e extra year.  So, th e Lok Sabha term was 
extended.  And, in that extended term, the entire Opposition was put to jail.  There 
was nobody there and entire Opposition was in jail.  At that time came the 
constitutional amendment.  The touchstone, that we need to have, that is whether 
the process is valid, was not followed.  Th at was a total invalidated process and, 
therefore, I would think that that was a blatant abuse, on which the country majorly 
agreed on.  Only five Members opposed the Bill in the Lok Sabha.  There was none in 
the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha to oppo se it.  Imagine constitutional amendment 
being passed and the entire Opposition was in  the jail.  In the Lok Sabha, only five 
people were there to oppose it, even some  coming from their own party, and in the 
Rajya Sabha, there was no opposition, and the constitutional amendment, changing 
the Preamble itself, happened.  The alterati on of the Preamble to include ‘socialist 
and secular’ highlights the disrespect and disregard the Congress has for the 
constitutional processes, principles and institutions. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
25

 
 
 Sir, the amendments were not about st rengthening democracy, but protecting 
those in power.   Again, the process is used for strengthening the family.   
Sir, while talking about whether the word, ‘socialism’ should be included in the 
Constitution, Baba Saheb Ambedkar argued, and, I quote, "I do not see, therefore, 
why the Constitution should tie down the peop le to live in a particular form and not 
leave it to the people themselves to decide it for themselves".  An d, therefore, in the 
original Constitution, the word, ‘socialis m’ was not there as much as the word 
‘secularism’.  Sir, 21 MPs, all belonging to  Opposition Parties, were put in jail.  
Respected Advani ji, respected Atal ji were in jail under the preventive detention law, 
the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, the infa mous ‘MISA’, and, I know 
political leaders who chose to have thei r children named after MISA to remember 
those black days, and, now, they won’t mind even having an alliance with them!  
Sir, all these put together turn the Consti tution into a qualitat ively different text 
from what it was originally adopted on November 26.  I would just like to make here 
one observation.  Opposition Member, Respected Jairam Ramesh ji, refers to the 
work of Granville Austin, with a left-handed compliment saying that they read it, but 
whether anyone else in the ruling party read it!  He says, Masterly book -- yes, the 
Masterly book -- and, he tells the full sto ry of the amendments carried out till 1980.  
Sir, I am starting from 1951 and, in the jo urney, I am going to talk about amendments, 
their purpose, their intent and their pro cess.  Now, since Mr . Jairam Ramesh has 
mentioned it, there is some Granville Austin ’s line, which I would also like to quote 
back to him.   It is about a lot of things, namely, the Emergency, the 42
nd Amendment 
Act, the landmark case, Kesavananda Bharati Case of 1973 and the Doctrine of Basic 
Structure. In the words of Granville Austin, "The import ant constitutional 
development of the Emergency, other than its very imposition, was the enactment of 
the 42 nd Amendment."  Austin further says, "Coming in November, 1976, the 
Amendment demonstrates the progression of the Prime Minister (referring to Mrs. 
Indira Gandhi) and her Government from having near absolute power without a 
coherent programme, other than the prot ection of her prime ministry to power 
expressed through fundamental constitutional change." So, it is exactly the point, I 
am putting forth about Emergency -- the way in which 42 nd Amendment was passed, 
how the Opposition leaders were put in jail, not even one Member opposing it in Rajya 
Sabha, and, that there were just five persons in the Lok Sabha, who spoke against it.  
Granville Austin has said this, and, Mr. Jairam Ramesh, who di d not mind quoting 
something else from Austin, ignored this.  Point proves.  So, selective… 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय जयराम रमेश जी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  माननीय शिƪिंसह जी, आप बैठ 
जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय जयराम रमेश जी। 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka) : Sir, this is a discussion on constitutional 
history, but I have,… …(Interruptions)… Mike, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, I have 
Granville Austin in my hands right now, and,  the same Granville Austin writes that the 
44th Amendment was passed by the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha to override large 
parts of the 42nd Amendment.   
 And who voted on the 7 th of December, 1978 to re peal parts of the 42nd 
Amendment?  It was Indira Gandhi herself. So, Indira Gandhi, in 1978, voted to repeal 
the parts of the 42nd Amendment, which sh e realized had resulted in her electoral 
loss. So, don't read selectively.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, Jairam Rameshji. Now hon. Minister, please. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी: सर, जयराम जी को बोलने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  He has responded.   ...(Interruptions)... Ãलीज़ आप बैठ 
जाइए। माननीय शिƪिंसह गोिहल जी, आप अपनी जगह लȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय जयराम 
रमेश जी, please be brief. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सर, मȅ आ
दरणीय जयराम रमेश जी का ज्ञानवधर्न करना 
चाहता हूं िक 1978 मȂ Morarji Desai was the Prime Minister. उस समय जनता पाटीर् की 
सरकार थी और जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ने 42nd अमȂडमȂट को 44th अमȂडमȂट से हटाने का काम 
िकया। आपको जनता ने हरा िदया था। Shrimati Indira Gandhi was no more the Prime 
Minister, and when she was the Prime Minister, तब उन्हȗने हर तरीके  से Ģजातंतर् को 
रोकने का, गला घȗटने का काम िकया था।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय जयराम रमेश जी।    
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, उन्हȗने मुझे ठीक तरीके  से नहीं सुना
 । मȅने कहा था िक 44th अमȂडमȂट 
1978 मȂ आया, उस समय मोरारजी देसाई Ģधान मंतर्ी थे। 6 िदसÇबर, 1978 को लोक सभा मȂ 
इंिदरा गांधी जी ने 44 th अमȂडमȂट क े िलए वोट िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने यही कहा था। 
..(Ëयवधान)... यही तो मȅने कहा था।  
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
27

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। ...(Ëयवधान)... िसफर् माननीय मंतर्ी जी की बात ही िरकॉडर् पर 
जाएगी।  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Thank you very much, Sir.  I fully accept Jairam 
Ramesh's observation. Obviously, the Leader  of the House was right in saying that 
Morarji Desai was the Prime Minister, and du ring the voting, Shrimati Indira Gandhi 
had said that, and she supported the changes to the 42nd Amendment.  Very well!  
But the idea that I have, right from the beginning, said is, ‘देर आए, दुरुÎत आए’ is what 
the Hindi language gives me.  But the fact remains, and I am glad that she changed 
her mind.   
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
It was such an improper thing to do during  an extended tenure of the Parliament, and 
an improper thing even worse to do, putting the opposition in jail and then seeking a 
constitutional amendment. So, at least, in  1978, after a massive defeat, which, of 
course, later, she overturned and won the election and came. That is a process.  
That is the electoral process, and the electoral process does teach lessons, and 
S h r i m a t i  I n d i r a  G a n d h i  l e a r n t  t h a t  l e s s o n .   I  w a n t  t o  s a y  t h i s  t o  t h e  C o n g r e s s  p a r t y  
today.  Shrimati Indira Gandhi learnt the lesson, and I am happy Jairam Ramesh says 
that she stood up to support the Amendm ent Morarji Desai and his Government was 
bringing.  But today's Congress, Sir, ...(Interruptions)...I will come to that.  Sir, 
today's Congress is the matter that we need  to talk about.  But before that, the 
eminent person who became Sp eaker later on, Shri Mavlankar, also said some 
things.  These are the words which we need to have a recall because it is important 
for all of us sitting in this august House to  know what the opinions were and then take 
the next 75 years, next 200 years, next 500 years forward of this Constitution. 
Mavlankar ji says, and I quote, This particular Bill brings an almost qualitative change 
in our constitution structure.  The tragedy of the situation is that by this Amendment 
Bill, the citizens, the courts of law, the States, the President, an d indeed ev
 en this 
House of Parliament are all sought to be denigrated and only the Union Executive is 
sought to be made to thrive, grab, and aggrandize.  So, if that one Amendment has 
brought in such thinking individual to say such harsh words, it needs retrospection.  
We should never repeat such great follies in which we took the Constitution for 
granted. 
 
12.00 Noon 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
People rejected such people.  Lessons have to be learned.  When I want to speak 
about the attitude of Congress today, I woul d like to come to one line of an eminent 
person which was said during the 42 nd Amendment debate.   He  was no less than a 
Chief Minister later on or prior to that al so, and a Minister.  But as a Congress M.P., 
Shri C.M. Stephen, an eminent Congressman… (Interruptions)…   Y e s .   I t  m i g h t  b e  
useful to remember that also.  I will read the qu ote.   It might be useful further.   Shri 
C.M. Stephen, as a Congress M.P. at that time, says this during the debate on 42 nd 
Amendment, which had so many implications .  It brings me shivers to read these 
lines.   I am reading it because we should  know how we speak.  I quote this.  "Now, 
the power of this Parliament, through the 42 nd Amendment, is declared to be out of 
bounds for any court."  He says this.  "Now , the power of this Parliament is declared 
to be out of bounds for any court. It is left to  the courts whether they should defy it."   
He continues saying, "I do not know whether they will have the temerity to do that.  
But if they do, that will be a bad day for the judiciary.  The Committee of the House is 
sitting with regard to the enquiry into th e conduct of judges.   We have got our 
methods, our machinery."  
Sir, imagine if today one of our MPs would say anywhere, "the temerity of the 
judges, the courts"! No.  And, what we hear from Congress today, "You are 
undermining institutions.  You have no respect for the Constitution." Look at this one 
statement.  During Emergency, passing the 42
nd amendment, it was the attitude of 
घमंड, and of the घमंिडया गठबंधन, even today.  But they spoke that while passing the 
42nd Amendment.   The people of India did not forgive this.  And that is why they lost 
miserably.  … (Interruptions)…  This was when she conceded to change the 
Amendment.  …(Interruptions)…  All right!  Don't beg for concessions like that.   What 
is today's INC?  उनका घमंड कम नहीं हुआ, मȅ उसको सािबत करना चाहती हूं।    This was in 
the Budget Session of 2022.   I am not taking the name of Congress leader who is not 
in this House.  But I am sure this statemen t will obviously ring a bell to everybody.  I 
quote the leader.  "The judiciary, the Election Commission, Pegasus, these are all 
instruments of destroying the voice of the Union of States."  You heard Shri C.M. 
Stephen then.  And you just see the st atements which are coming.  Committed 
judiciary is what they wanted.  The contem pt for the judiciary and the constitutional 
bodies is not new now.   That term was used by one eminent Congressman.  I will 
take the name of that eminent Congressman because I have to quote him.  It was Shri 
Mohan Kumarmangalam. He had said, "The Government will appoint Chief Justices 
based on the Government's assessment of their philosophy and outlook."  He was 
telling the Parliament in 1973, "Certainly, we  as a Government have a duty to take 
(into consideration) the philosophy and outlook of the judge in coming to the 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
29

 
 
conclusion whether he should or should not lead the Suprem e Court at this time."  I 
repeat this quote. "Certainly, we as a Government have a duty to take the philosophy 
and the outlook of the judge in coming to th e conclusion whether he should or should 
not lead the Supreme Court at this time." 
 Sir, you are an eminent advocate, who became a senior advocate at a very 
young age, and I stand before you, talking small things about judiciary. Pardon me if I 
have any oversight which is not worked well. A day after the historic judgment on April 
25, 1973 in the Kesavananda Bharati case, in which the majority  declared that the 
Parliament cannot alter or abridge the basi c structure of the Constitution, Shrimati 
Indira Gandhi was furious with the judgment because it constricted the party's plan to 
bring in major amendments. So , the three Judges – this is  what I want to highlight 
about ‘committed judiciary’ - if they are not there, we will do wh at we want – were 
accorded swift punishment via supersession on April 26 an d Justice A. N. Ray, who 
did not subscribe to the majority decision, was elevated. After Justice Ray retired in 
1977, again Shrimati Indira Gandhi Govern ment gave supersession, superseding the 
senior-most Judge, Justice Hans Raj Kha nna, to appoint Justice Mirza Hameedullah 
Beg as the Chief Justice! So, it is really sa d that the test that I am putting each one of 
these amendments to, – whether they were in  line with the constitutional spirit or 
whether the process was followed or whethe r the large economic or social good was 
considered as an objective – none of them meet that.  
Sir, the OBC Commission is something wh ich I want to mention in contrast. 
Our intent was clear; Prime Minister Modi was clear that the OBC Commission will 
have to be set up and that constitutional  amendments have to empower communities 
and not put them at a disadvantage. Therefore, the 102
nd Constitution Amendment 
Act was brought forward in 2018 to insert Ar ticle 338B. But, what is the contrast with 
the Congress? In 1950, Kaka Kalelkar  Commission was formed but Congress 
prevented its report from being published. Dr. Ambedkar was of the view that Pandit 
Nehru was not concerned about the welfar e, was not concerned enough about the 
welfare of the SCs. I quote Babasaheb Ambedkar. He said, From the very first 
election, we have been fighting against the Congress because it is unnecessarily 
interfering with our rights. Just see the leader of the Congress Party, Pandit Nehru; he 
has delivered 2,000 speeches during the last  20 years but he has never spoken about 
the welfare of Scheduled Castes even once." These are Babasaheb Ambedkar's 
words. He further says, "From this, you can judge what sympathy the Congress 
Party can have for our people when its leader  is so much adamant."Sir, this is said 
several times but it is worth saying now.  Congress did not even allow Babasaheb's 
photo to be installed in the Central Hall of the old Parliament House for decades. He 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
was, of course, denied Bharat Ratna. Similarly, the Mandal Commission was 
constituted to provide reservation for Backwa rd Classes but Shrimati Indira Gandhi or 
even Shri Rajiv Gandhi opposed it, dela ying 27 per cent reservation for OBCs in 
Central and State institutions. ...(Interruptions)...So, we are the ones who brought it 
in, not the Congress. ...(Interruptions)...One  more instance is of how GST, which 
was again a constitutional amendment, wa s brought in. ...(Interruptions)...  GST-
related   constitutional  provisions were ne ver encouraged prior to its bringing forward 
by Prime Minister Modi in 2017. They started very quickly to trace the timeline.          
 Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee was the first to  suggest, during the NDA rule in 2000, 
to get going with the GST.  However, th e sincere efforts that he made could not 
realize or could not see the light of the day and the ten years, after his tenure, led by 
the UPA, did not do much to get it on board.  Within two years, after the introduction 
of the GST in the Parliament, the GST-related 101
st Constitution Amendment Act was 
passed and ratified by more than 15 States with effect from 8th September, 2016.  Just 
the data will tell you where the Congress Party was.  Despite being a coalition 
comprising of 26 parties, the UPA could not manage to get this GST.  Even 
Congress-ruled States were opposed for the GST to be brought in.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  That is a 
*.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  In 2012…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  It was the Chief Minister of Gujarat who opposed it. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  I will say that as well.  …(Interruptions)…  That 
will also be said.  …(Interruptions)…  Three BJP-ruled States..…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : It was the Chief Minister of Gujarat who 
opposed..…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Three BJP-ruled States also opposed.  
…(Interruptions)…  I don’t  hide facts.  …(Interruptions)…  Three BJP-ruled States also 
opposed including... …(Interruptions)…    
 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.   
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
31

 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Gujarat opposed it.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  ‘Gujarat’, I am saying that.  …(Interruptions)…  I 
am saying it myself that Gujarat opposed it.  …(Interruptions)…  I am saying it myself.  
…(Interruptions)…  आप नंबूदरीपाद गवनर्मȂट को काँगर्ेस से सेव नहीं कर पाए, आप क्यȗ खड़े हो 
रहे  हȅ? …(Ëयवधान)...  आप कÇयुिनÎट हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)...  आप बैठ जाइए। …(Ëयवधान)...Three 
non-BJP-ruled States.. …(Interruptions)…  I don’t.. …(Interruptions)…  Three non-
BJP-ruled States -- I have said about Gu jarat, now I am saying ‘non-BJP-ruled 
States’ – including Congress-ruled Maharashtra opposed provisions of the UPA’s 
GST.  So, if they want to first shout about Gujarat, I am saying it myself.  But please 
do shout a
bout Maharashtra as well.  No!  They  want to pretend they were all ready.  
…(Interruptions)…  They were not ready.  …(Interruptions)…  Alright, the Congress-led 
ruling UDF Government in Kerala voi ced severe concerns.  Okay, Sir!  
…(Interruptions)…  Left front opposes, UDF opposes, Congress is part of the UDF; 
but no, they will never say that.  …(Interruptions)…  One Gujarat is what they want to 
say and I will tell you why Gujarat had to oppose also.  …(Interruptions)…   So, they 
could not bring the GST amendment.  When we  bring it, this is how they would like to 
shout about it, but I am sorry..…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, the Finance Minister is 
*.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  I am not  *, I am sorry .  …(Interruptions)…  I will 
have to demand a written apology from Shri Jairam Ramesh for accusing me of , 
which I never do.   …(Interruptions)…  And whether it is parliamentary or 
unparliamentary, first of all, the Chair,  I trust you will take care of that.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I will take care of that.  I w ill take care of both sides.   
…(Interruptions)…     
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.   
 
 
 
 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  But accusing me of  lying, it is now very clear, 
runs in the Congress blood. Somebody had to go to the Court to say ‘sorry’.    
…(Interruptions)…   When  I   was   the     Defence  Minister, not only did they call 
Prime Minister Shri Modi as a 
* but they kept calling me that I am *  …(Interruptions)…  
And who had to go and apologize in the court?  …(Interruptions)…  And now, I won’t 
mind seeing another Member going and apol ogizing in the court, although the word 
said in the Parliament is never taken to the court.  …(Interruptions)…  When the GST 
was brought in – this is also something wh ich the Congress will have to gulp if they 
can -- all MPs present in the House, includ ing those of the Congress, had voted for 
the GST constitutional amendment which was brought in by Prime Minister Shri Modi.  
…(Interruptions)…  In fact, I would not mind if Shri Jairam Ramesh once again calls me 
saying, I am * but records of the Parliament wo uld say it.  Shri Jairam Ramesh 
wanted to move some amendments but Dr . Manmohan Singh personally asked him 
not to do so because of the fine consensus that had been arrived in the GST Council.  
…(Interruptions)…  Sir, I don’t * records don’t *   …(Interruptions)…  Don’t jump in a 
hurry to accuse me that I am *  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, please ask her to authenticate..…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Oh! …(Interruptions)…   I will authenticate it, but 
you have to authenticate that I am 
* please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister...…(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Please authenticate it.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Yes, yes.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, it is a fair comment by Shri Jairam Ramesh.  
You need to authenticate it. …(Interruptions)… During the course of the day, when I 
                                         
 
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.   
 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
33

 
 
watched the Lok Sabha debates, I frequent ly came across, ‘please authenticate’. It 
was started in this House. Now, hon. Minister. 
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Thank you, Sir, I will authenticate. And, despite 
the support given by the Congress in passing the GST constitutional amendment, you 
have the Congress leader, again not ta king name, goes about calling the GST ‘ गÅबर 
िंसह टैक्स’. And, Sir, therefore, about amendm ents, I have said some words. Now I 
just want to… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, but, if some ‘ गÅबर िंसह’ comes and files a suit then!  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir,… …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  If some ‘ गÅबर िंसह’ in the country comes forward and says, I have 
been defamed there. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  And, the problem, Si r, is when GST matters 
come, I will sometime again speak as  much as I have done it earlier.  
…(Interruptions)…  Congress Ministers are sitting and arguing about rates that they 
will not know. In the GST Council-- Congress 
State  Finance  Ministers are also sitting and talking about it.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, 
we are marking 75 years of the Constitution . I want to just remind again something 
very quickly. When 75 years of India’s Independence was marked in 2022, Prime 
Minister Modi had celebrated it in the name of आज़ादी का अमृत महोत्सव. Throughout 
the country, every State Government part icipated, every State Government also 
picked up all the freedom fighters known, unknown, all of them  were celebrated and 
there was a lot of discussion all over the country.  …(Interruptions)…  And, recently, 
Sir, the Prime Minister also spoke about the 11 oaths that we need to take in the Lok 
Sabha. And, in 2022, from the Red Fort, he had announced how through पंच Ģण, we 
need to get out of गुलामी की मानिसकता, look forward to building this country and 
taking it forward and so on.  …(Interruptions)…    B u t ,  o n  7 5  y e a r s  o f  I n d i a ’ s  
independence, आज़ादी का अमृत महोत्सव, 75 years
  of the Constitution, we are having 
these wonderful debates in both the Houses . Every 25 or 50 years are celebrated.  I 
would like to remind as to what was the celebration during 25 years of India’s 
Independence? What did we do? I am co ntrasting this.  What did we do on 
completion of 25 years in 1973? … (Interruptions)…    Sir, how was 25 years of 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Independence celebrated in 1973? There was a time capsule, a time capsule, a 
kalpaatra, was interned in the Red Fort. And, at that time, the people were toldm this 
time capsule will be seen only after 5000 year s. And, in the time capsule, the journey 
of free India was all being written and, actua lly, it was kept as a top secret. Nobody 
knew anything as to what was inside th e time capsule. A Professor of History was 
employed to write ‘India Since 1947’, marking the 25 th anniversary, but it was kept as 
a secret!  Questions were aske d in the Parliament as to what exactly is in the time 
capsule, marking 25 years of India's Indepe ndence? What actually went into that 
intern? It was a steel and copper-made, va cuum-filled case into which the document 
was interned, and then it was put into the Re d Fort! That one, Sir, was kept a secret. 
When asked in the Parliament, the then Education Minister apparently said, and I am 
reading it from the book published by an eminent parliamentarian, Era Sezhiyan.  He 
puts it in his book as to what was the repl y given by the then Ed ucation Minister and I 
would like to quote. 
 Before that, the Education Minister expres sed his inability to disclose the said 
document. What is the document which is in it?  "No, I cannot disclose." And what 
did he say?  I quote, "Within the limitation of its compass, it was designed to 
preserve an authentic record of  our time for posterity. Havi ng regard to this concept, 
the question of contemporaneous publications , or laying the text of the document on 
the Table of the House, does not arise." The Education Minister, while he put the 
time capsule to be preserved for 5,000 year s, does not allow the Parliament to know 
what was inside it. That is 1973, two year s before the Emergency was brought.  This 
kind of an operation in stealth happened,  marking 25 years of India’s Independence 
and the Parliament should not be informed . That was the line the Education Minister 
gives. Even worse, Sir, I just want to highlight what was said about Shri Atal Bihari 
Vajpayee in that capsule content. I would like to say and I quote from the book. The 
BJP of Atal Bihari Vajpayee is described as, says the author, and I quote, "Jan Sangh 
(People’s Party) is a militant orthodox Hindu party opposing the concept of secular 
State."This is what is being said about Atal Bihari Vajpayee in the capsule, about 
which they don’t say in the House. …(Interruptions)…They didn’t say it in the House. 
Even worse, Sir, if that is the record for first 25 years of independent India, which has 
to be preserved for 5,000 years, look at what has been said.  …(Interruptions)…About 
C. Rajagopalachari, there was no reference. …(Interruptions)… There was no 
reference to Shri C. Rajagopalachari, the fi rst Governor-General of this country, and 
the President of India, Dr. Rajendra  Prasad, had no mention in that 
content,…(Interruptions)… Dr. Radhakrishnan, Zakir Hussa in and the Prime Minister, 
Lal Bahadur Shastri, who, though short in physical stature, was tall in political stature, 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
35

 
 
went all the way to Tashkent as a pilgrim of peace to establish harmony in this part of 
the world.  This author, who is a parliame ntarian, asks, "Don’t you think that such 
names deserve to be inscribed in the histor ical document of our country during the 
period of the first quarter century of Indian  Independence?"  So, that is the level of 
secrecy even about Members of Parliame nt, about eminent l eaders of different 
political parties, and sly comments, were a ll packed up in that. Later, it was all 
removed. That is the nature of Congress Party; I want to highlight that fact. 
…(Interruptions)… Sir, the names missed out is something which shocks the country, 
but that was the level to which the party we nt in the arrogance with which they were 
trying to rule. …(Interruptions)… Sir, the Constitution and the misuse is what I am 
talking about here.  …(Interruptions)… One more thing, agai n, on the economic 
impact of such amendments which they brin g in. It is a test for every one of us, 
whether it is one amendment today or another amendment tomorrow, does it have an 
economic intent for the larger economic good , social intent, process, constitutional 
sprit? Let us see, let us test each one of our acts, the amendments , that we bring in 
and then decide as to whether what we ar e doing is right. Sir, the Soviet model, 
which the Congress Party copied under Prime Minister, Nehru, continued with Indira 
Gandhi, was a model which did not do any good to this country. …(Interruptions)… 
The socialism, that socialism was refashioned as Mahalanobis model, the central 
command and control structure, the license quota raj were all part of this and, in that, 
C. Rajagopalachari writes to the Prime Minist er.  He says in an open letter, "Nehru 
came to Madras on Tuesday with all the paraphernalia of Prime Minister of India and 
attempted to, in his speech, talk about Rajagopalachari and his principles."  
 But, here in Swarajya Magazine, he publishes it in 17
th February, 1962, and I 
quote from that article.  He says, "I want an India clear of the atmosphere of fear in 
which it is now enveloped where honest men engaged in difficult tasks of production 
or trade can carry on their o ccupation without fear of ruin at the hands of officials, 
Ministers and party bosses."  He further sa ys, "I want an India where talent and 
energy can find scope for play without having  to cringe and obtain special individual 
permission from officials and ministers and where their efforts will be judged by the 
o p e n  m a r k e t  o f  I n d i a " .   H e  g o e s  o n  t o  s a y ,  " I  w a n t  t h e  c o r r u p t i o n  o f  t h i s  P e r m i t  
License Raj to go."  He says that.  So  a Member, who was part of the Congress 
Party himself, writes to Pandit Nehru sayi ng, ‘This cannot go on.  Your socialism is 
ruining this country.  The Licen se Permit Raj could not continue because it is leading 
to corruption’.   Periodically, Congress questions, "The BJP, RSS, Jan Sangh, what 
w a s  t h e i r  r o l e  d u r i n g  t h e  f r e e d o m  m o v e m e n t ?   W e  a l l  k n o w  i t  a n d  w e  h a v e  s a i d  i t .   
But, I want to ask the Congress, ‘What is yo ur role in the India's economic freedom?’  
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
What is India's economic growth?  What is your effort in building economic strength 
of India?  Sir, why from 1980 onwards, the Congress Party itself wants to dump 
License Quota Raj?  In 1991, they want to reform and then take the claim for it saying, 
‘we are the ones we reform’.  You didn't have to reform if it was so good.  It was 
damaging the Indian economy and socialism was, therefore, brought into the 
Constitution’s Preamble through the 42 nd Amendment Act only to prove that they are 
doing right thing although that was not needed at all because the Directive Principle of 
State Policy has enough and more. And, th at is where I want to bring this one 
particular important observation. The ‘Nehru Development Model’, Arvind 
Panagariya’s latest book will tell you, Sir, from an academic perspective also, how the 
socialism, the Control Raj, the License Quota Raj of the Congress’s 50 years of rule 
ruined our economy.  Though the country di d come to terms with its mistake and 
changed course in 1991, by then it had lost four precious decades.  Moreover, the 
history built over these decades continued to  haunt its development efforts even after 
the change of course.  One thing was, the ba se income remained low.  And, in spite 
of an opportunity to grow rapidly, it was missed in early decades.  Therefore, even an 
acceleration in growth to 7 to 8 per cent range on a sustained basis could not deliver 
genuine prosperity for another few decades.  Moreover, four decades of patronage of 
socialist ideas and policies came to hard wire Indian politicians, bureaucrats, 
intellectuals and even busine ss people in ways that made  a swift march to a market 
economy politically challenging.  That is th e reality of the policy of the Congress party 
which claims, ‘we have reformed the count ry’.  They baggaged the country for 50 
years and later they wanted to claim that they are reforming and bringing prosperity to 
this country, which is not true.  Firs t of all, Sir, with socialism, 42
nd Amendment 
changing the Preamble, the much-promised Garibi Hatao has not been delivered by 
them.  If it has not been de livered by them, what did that socialism do to us?  So, 
when Prime Minister Modi says, Viksit Bharat, 2047, we all should work together to 
make sure that  it is done with all of ou r responsibilities intact.  Such changes to the 
Constitution they brought, have only decayed the Indian economy.  I will not get into 
the details. 
 I will not get into the details. There is another paper of 2009 from Cato Institute 
Centre for Global Liberty and Prosperity. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  What are we discussing? 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  We are discussing the Constitution, and the 
mistakes done by the Congress Party, as a result of which the Indian economy is 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
37

 
 
suffering. Socialism kills the human cost of de layed economic reforms in India.   I will 
authenticate this and give it to you to sh ow how Congress Party's attempts have only 
weakened the Indian economy. ...(Interruptions)...We changed that by clearly 
saying that the Budget will now very clearly  focus on the Indian  economy and, as a 
result of which, we will see a lot of economi c growth. I am not getting into the details 
of the Budget Speech 2021.  Those interested can see paragraph 86.   
I will come to the points about the Constituent Assembly, financial inclusion, 
and economic justice. That is why, I argu ed first saying this  declaration in the 
Preamble, bringing socialism, was not warranted at all. There is enough and more 
said in the Directive Principles of State Policy.  The Directive Principles of State Policy 
are adequate for us to do all the socio-eco nomic justice related activities.  But, the 
Congress party was doing it for their political agenda, rather than for the larger good. 
...(Interruptions)...Sir, I would like to quote here Dr . Ambedkar.  He  says, on 19th 
November 1948, "Our objective in framing the Constitution is really two-fold:  To lay 
down the form of political democracy; to  lay down that our ideal is economic 
democracy and also to prescribe that every Government, whichever is in power, shall 
strive to bring about economic democracy".  Dr. Ambedkar says this.  The Directive 
Principles of State Policy have a great va lue for they lay down that our ideal is 
economic democracy.  And, this is exactly what the hon. Prime Minister Modi ji is 
doing. Fifty-four crore citizens, who on ce had no means, are now being given 
extraordinary connection to banking through the Jan Dhan Yojana -- principles 
guiding our democracy, equity, just ice and opportunity. Fifty crore Mudra Loan 
accounts have created the pathway for micro- entrepreneurs, street vendors, and so 
on. ...(Interruptions)...Sir, Article 38 of the Directive Principles of State Policy says, 
"The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and 
protecting social order, by ensuring socio-economic political justice, and by 
minimizing inequalities in income status, f acilities and opportunities". Article 39 also 
says very similar about adequate means of livelihood and ownership control. Article 
46 speaks about the Scheduled Castes and th e Scheduled Tribes. So, I just want to 
highlight how, because of the specific actions taken by our Government, you find… 
...(Interruptions)...For a minute, Sir, I go back to 1969.  Mrs. Indira Gandhi, on the 
banks’ nationalization, said that the politi cal situation in our country demands, "That 
banking facilities should be extended in an increasing measure to  backward areas, to 
agriculture, to small-scale industry and so on. And perhaps banking operation should 
be informed by a larger social purpose".  Bu t, in spite of introducing ‘Socialism’ into 
the Preamble, they did not achieve any of the objectives which Mrs. Indira Gandhi 
justified for bringing nationalisation of the banks. They paid only lip service.  By 2011, 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the census data reveals, less than 60 per cent of Indian househ olds had access to 
banking service. Zero balance bank accounts were only 10.3 crores. In contrast, 54 
crore Jan Dhan accounts have been opened  since 2014. Fifty-six per cent of the 
accounts belong to women; similarly, pensio ns, insurance and so on.  Under the PM 
MUDRA, out of 50 crore sanctioned accounts, 68 per cent belong to women. Under 
Stand Up India, there are one crore SC/S T women borrowers and Rs. 30,000 crores 
have been distributed to 2.5 lakh people, of whom 76 per cent are women 
beneficiaries.                                                
 Under PM SVANidhi,  loan of Rs.50,000/ - has been given  to 67,00,000 street 
vendors, of whom 45 per cent are women, 42 per cent are OBCs and so on.   We 
repeatedly, in Lok Sabha and here,  spoke about how former Prime Minister said, "If I 
send one rupee down, only 15 paise reaches."  By bringing in technology and using 
DBT, Prime Minister Modi made sure that the beneficiaries will receive their money 
directly into their accounts.   One rupee means one rupee will reach them and this has 
helped save Rs. 3.48 lakh crores of tax pa yers’ money.   These are very important to 
say that the Directive Principles of State Po licy which has even more things for all of 
us to do can bring in poverty alleviation, but not the naara ‘Garibi Hatao’,  which 
delivered nothing on poverty.    
 Sir, lastly, I will pay my respects to the women who were part of the 
Constitution-making.   As I have said, 15  out of 385 Members we re women.  I would 
think, you will indulge me, when I read the names of these 15 women --  Ammu 
Swaminathan,  Annie Mascarenhas, Daksha yani Velayudhan, Begum Aizaz Rasul,  
Durgabai Deshmukh, Hansa Jivraj Mehta,  Kamla Chaudhary,  Leela Roy,  Malati 
Choudhury,  Purnima Banerjee , Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Renuk a Ray, Sarojini Naidu,  
Sucheta Kripalani and Vijaya Lakshmi Pand it were the prominent women who were 
part of the Constituent Assembly. The contribution of these women in the 
Constitution-making is immense.  I know, af ter that, Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit scaled  
heights in diplomacy.  Rajkumari Amrit Ka ur became the first woman to be a Union 
Cabinet Minister.  Durgabai Deshmukh wa s the founding member of the Planning 
Commission. Annie Mascarenhas and Renuka Ray served as Ministers in their 
respective State Governments.  Sarojini Na idu and Sucheta Krip alani went on to 
become first female  Governor and Chief Mini ster respectively.   Sir, I also appreciate 
the immense role played by the All In dia Women’s Conferen ce which has done 
extremely good work.These wome n were all celebrated during  Azadi ka Amrit 
Mahotsav, which we celebrated from 2022.   The last observation I would like to make 
is this. It is very interesting that in this House the first Act that we passed is the  
Reservation for Women, which was the new Act passed in the ne w Parliament.   I 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
39

 
 
would like to reiterate that Bhartiya Janata Party, my party has always been 
committed for women and women’s participation in politics.   Even as early as 1994, 
in Vadodra National Convention, the BJP very clearly passed that  seats must be 
reserved for women in both, Parliament an d State Assemblies.  Then, in 1998, BJP 
reiterated its commitment for women reservati on by introducing it  in the Lok Sabha. 
..(Interruptions)…  In July, 2003, BJP in its  National Executive in Raipur,  also passed 
a resolution to give reservation.   In 2007,    BJP National Executive approved 33 per 
cent reservation for women.   In 2008, agai n, BJP amended its Constitution, so that 
its own office bearers will have 33 per cent reservation for women.   And, I am glad to 
say that I am one of the beneficiaries of that  reservation.    And, BJP has consistently 
supported women’s reservation in Rajya Sabh a in 2010.  I remember, late Shri Arun 
Jaitley supported passionately to pass it and,  in Rajya Sabha, it was passed.   But, 
curiously, why that did not go to Lok Sabha, no one knows.   And, in the Lok Sabha, 
I think it was for reasons bette r known, but what was said in the public was some of 
the alliance partners were not favouring, and, therefore the Indian National Congress  
did not have the courage to take it into the Lok Sabha at that time.  BJP’s  Sankalp 
Patra of 2014 supported women’s reservation, and, again, Sankalp Patra before the 
2019 election also very clearly supported it.  Bu t I want to highlight  the fact, Sir, that 
in 1984-89, Shri Rajiv Gandhi  had 426 Members in the Lok Sabha and 159 Members 
in the Rajya Sabha.  
  But they did not have the conviction to pass the Women's Reservation Bill at 
that time. ...(Interruptions)... Very clearly, they have b een anti-women always. The 
Shah Bano case is a very clear example. ...(Interruptions)... Sir, I would highlight the 
fact that although the credit is being taken for the Panchayat Reservation Act by Shri 
Rahul Gandhi and the dynasty, it was not him. ...(Interruptions)...It was Shri P.V. 
Narasimha Rao who brought it and passed it on. ...(Interruptions)...But even then it 
was only a lip-service because no financia l powers were given. Now, hon. H.D. 
Devegowdaji, who is the former Prime Minist er, is not here, but in 1996 during his 
time, the Reservation Bill was brought in. ...(Interruptions)...Nothing was supported 
by Congress at that time. Atal Bihari Vajpayeeji in 1998, in 1999, in 2002 and in 2003 
brought it. ...(Interruptions)...No, the Congress wouldn't support. But the 
Congress's memory is very weak that they didn't support any of the Bills  all the time, 
whether it was of Devegowdaji or whethe r it was of Atal Bihari Vajpayeeji. 
...(Interruptions)...And then in 2008, even Dr. Ma nmohan Singh faltered. They 
managed to pass it in Rajya Sabha, which I said a minute ago, but did not go to the 
Lok Sabha for fear of their alliance partners  threatening to walk out of the alliance. 
They didn't want to lose power, but they wanted to save their kursi only and therefore 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
did not do justice to the women, whereas, the Prime Minister Modi and BJP, from the 
beginning, stood by women, made the firs t change in the party and brought the 
Reservation Bill here. ...(Interruptions)...Therefore, if anybod y is committed to the 
Constitution, it is the BJP, Prime Minister  Modi and this Government. Therefore, the 
people who are walking with a book in their hand, ‘Constitution’, sometimes not 
knowing that inside there are kora kagaz; nothing printed. ...(Interruptions).. They 
are not even opening it to see whether it is there, but they are walking around with this 
book. They should know that  they are the ones who rep eatedly have failed the cause 
of the Constitution of India. Thank you very much, Sir.     
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
                                                                                        
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, to accommodate Members willing to participate in 
the discussion and ensure sufficient time, if the House agrees, the lunch hour may be 
skipped today and tomorrow.  
 
SOME HON. MEMEBRS: Yes, Sir.  
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE "GLORIOUS JOURNEY OF 75 YEARS OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA" -Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, if required, I will take a call to increase the time further.  Now, 
hon. Leader of the Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge. 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) : सर, आपने मुझे बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ 
आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं।  
सर, आज 16 िदसÇबर है, यह बंगलादेश का िलĤेशन डे है। हमारी बहादुर नेता Ǜीमती 
इंिदरा गांधी जी ने पािकÎतान क े दो ट ुकड़े कर
के , बंगलादेश को िलĤेट करके  और एक लाख 
पािकÎतानी सैिनकȗ को बंदी बनाकर इस देश को बचाया, िजससे इस देश की शान पूरी दुिनया मȂ 
बढ़ गई। एक लाख लोगȗ को बंदी बनाना बहुत मुिÌ
कल काम है, लेिकन िजनको ‘आयरन लेडी’ 
कहते हȅ, उन्हȗने यह बता िदया िक अगर हमारे नज़दीक कोई आया, तो उसकी खैर नहीं। आज 
बंगलादेश िलĤेशन डे है। वहां जो गड़बड़ी चल रही है, तो कम से कम ये लोग अपनी आंख 
खोलकर वहां की minority को बचाने की कोिश
श करȂ।  
 सर, मȅ आपको एक चीज़ बताना चाहता हूं और यहां से शुरू  करता हूं िक हमने 
कांÎटीǷूशन पढ़ा। नहीं पढ़ा, तो मȅ उनको बताना चाहता हूं िक हमȂ भी थोड़ा-थोड़ा पढ़ना आता 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
41

 
 
है। …( Ëयवधान)… सर, हम Çयुिनिसपैिलटी Îकू ल मȂ पढ़े हȅ, वे जवाहरलाल नेहरू  यूिनविर्सटी मȂ 
पढ़े हȅ, तो िनिÌचत है िक उनकी अंगर्ेजी भी अच्छी होगी, िंहदी भी अच्छी होगी और बाकी सभी 
क ु छ भी अच्छा होगा, लेिकन उनकी करतूत अच्छी नहीं है।…(Ëयवधान)… सर, मȅ आपको अहमद 
फराज़ की ‘मत क़त्ल करो, आवाज़ȗ को’, एक शायरी सुनाना चाहता हूं-   
 
“तुम अपने अक़ीदȗ क े नेज़े, हर िदल मȂ उतारे जाते हो 
हम लोग मोहÅबत वाले हȅ, तुम ख़ंजर क्यूँ लहराते हो। 
इस शहर मȂ नगमे बहने दो, बÎती मȂ हमȂ भी रहने दो 
हम पालनहा
र हȅ फ ूलȗ क े, हम ख़ुशबू क े रखवाले हȅ 
तुम िकस का लहू पीने आए, हम Ãयार िसखाने वाले हȅ। 
इस शहर मȂ िफर क्या देखो
गे, जब हफ़र् यहाँ मर जाएगा 
जब तेग़ पे लय कट जाएगी, जब शेर सफ़र कर जाएगा। 
जब क़त्ल हुआ सुर साज़ȗ का, जब काल पड़ा आवाज़ȗ का 
जब शहर खंडहर बन जाएगा, िफर िकस पर संग उठाओगे 
अपने चेहरे आईनȗ मȂ, जब देखोगे डर जाओगे।” 
  
 महोदय, मȅ यह इसिलए कह रहा हूं, क्यȗिक आज की िÎथित, आज की पिरिÎथित जो है, 
तो हमȂ बताना पड़ता है िक क ै से इस संिवधान क े तहत हुक ूमत चलाने वाले लोग क्वोट-क्वोट 
करके  - आगे का, पीछे का, बीच का सब बोलते रहते हȅ।  उन्
हȗने सोशिलज्म पर बहुत आपिǄ 
उठाई।  मȅ यहां से शुरू  करूं गा िक संिवधान मȂ िĢएÇबल मȂ जो िलखा है, िजन लोगȗ ने 
कांिÎटǷुएंट असेÇबली मȂ िलखा है और इसको सवर्सÇमित से पास िकया है, उस पर भी आपिǄ 
जता रहे हȅ, तो आप ही सोिचए िक ये कांिÎटǷूशन क े फ ेवर मȂ हȅ या अगȂÎट मȂ हȅ।   
“We, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, ha
ving solemnly resolved to constitute India into 
a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRAT IC REPUBLIC and to secure to all 
its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political, LIBERTY of thought, 
expression, belief, faith and worship, EQUALI TY of status and of opportunity, and to 
promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring  the dignity of the individual and the 
unity and integrity of the nation.” सर, हमने इसको संिवधान मȂ 26 नवÇबर, 1949 को Îवीकार 
िकया।  जब हमने यह Îवीकार िकया है, तो इसके  तहत हमȂ चलना चािहए, हमȂ implement 
करना चािहए।  िसफर् एक-दूसरे की किमयां िनकालकर अगर आप बोलते जाएंगे, तो पांच हजार 
सालȗ मȂ क ैसी तकलीफ हम लोगȗ को दी है, मुझे भी यह बोलना पड़ेगा।   
 मȅ लाया हूं। आपकी मंशा क्या थी? जो संिव
धान बने, वह ‘ मनुÎमृित’  क े  तहत बने। 
‘मनुÎमृित’ क े जो कानून बनाए गए हȅ, उसके  तहत कायर् करना चा िहए था – ऐसी  जनसंघ की 
मंशा थी, ऐसी आरएसएस की मंशा थी, ऐसी आपकी मंशा थी, और आप सोशिलज्म की बात करते 
हȅ!  …(Ëयवधान)… 
आपका इनइक्वैिलटी मȂ फ े थ है। यह पिढ़ए, यह आपकी है। मȅने तो इसको पढ़ा है, इसमȂ 
िलखा है और मȅ पढ़कर बोलता हूं। मȅने नहीं पढ़ा - आप ऐसा मत समिझए
गा। मȅने इस िकताब मȂ 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
जो-जो पǄे लगाए हȅ, वे पढ़कर लगाए हȅ। अगर आप ये पेज़ पढ़Ȃगे, तो आपके  रȗगटे खड़े हो 
जाएंगे।  …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Kindly address the Chair. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  आप एडर्ेस छोिड़ए उनको, आपको यहाँ देखना भी अच्छा नहीं लगता 
आप, छोिड़ए।  … (Ëयवधान)… सर, इसमȂ क्या िलखा है, वह मȅ आपके  सामने ĢेजȂट करता हूं। जो 
लोग झंडे से नफरत करते हȅ, जो लोग हमारे अशोक चकर् से नफरत करते हȅ, जो लोग संिवधान से 
नफरत करते हȅ - वे लोग आज हमȂ पाठ पढ़ा रहे हȅ!  यह क्या है? जब यह संिवधान बना, उस 
वƪ संिवधान को जलाने वाले लोग …(Ëयवधान)… िजस िदन यह इिÇÃलमȂट िकया गया, उस िदन 
रामलीला मैदान मȂ बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर, जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी और महात्मा गाँधी जी का 
पुतला वहाँ पर रखकर जलाया गया। ...(Ëयवधा
न). . . इन लोगȗ ने जलाया। संिवधान क ै से बचाया, 
क्या िकया? इन्हȗने नेहरू  जी को गािलयाँ दीं, इंिदरा जी को गािलयाँ दीं, यहाँ तक िक पूरी गाँधी 
फ ैिमली को गािलयाँ दीं। आपको शमर् आनी चाि हए। आप लोग पिढ़ए। आप इितहास पिढ़ए। 
काँÎटीटू एंट असेÇबली की िडबेट पढ़ने क े बाद, संिवधान बनने क े बाद आप लोगȗ ने संिवधान क े 
बारे मȂ क ैसी, क ैसी बातȂ बोली हȅ, कही हȅ, आप उसको देख लीिजएगा। …(Ëयवधान)… लेिकन ये 
लोग िंढढ़ोरा पीटा करते हȅ! सर, मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता  हूं   …
(Ëयवधान)…  I am not yielding. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA) : It should be 
authenticated. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, only when the sp eaker will yield, I can give an 
opportunity.  If there are issues, you can ha ve notice, and I am sure the House will 
bear with me on this. I have a mind to enrich myself िक जो िकताब आपने िदखाई है, मȅ 
उसे बाद मȂ पढ़ू ँगा।   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  मȅ आपको अभी देता हूं। यह मनुÎमृित की िक ताब है। इसके  तीन-चार 
चैÃटर हȅ, आप उतना पढ़ लीिजएगा और मुझे वापस कर दीिजएगा, क्यȗिक यह आजकल िमलती 
नहीं है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, can I return a document put on the Table? I can’t. 
It has to be put on the Table.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : मȅ आपको एक और खरीदकर दे देता हूं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please continue.   
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
43

 
 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर, मȅ  आपको 7 िदसंबर, 2022 का िदन याद िदलाना चाहता हूं। जब 
आप पहली बार सभापित क े रूप  मȂ इस सदन मȂ पधारे थे, तब मȅने आपके  Îवागत मȂ कहा था िक 
"आपको िनयमȗ, मेÇबसर् क े अिधक ारȗ  और भावनाओं की जानकारी बहुत है। जैसे, संसद दो 
सदनȗ से िमलकर चलती है, उसी तरह लोकतंतर् सǄा पक्ष और िवपक्ष क े दो पिहयȗ पर चलता है। 
सǄा दल का अपना सरकारी एजȂडा होता है और हम यहाँ लोगȗ क े मुǈȗ और उनके  सवालȗ की 
चचार् चाहते हȅ।" मȅने पूछा था - " हमारे संिव
धान िनमार्ताओं ने िजस मकसद से राज्य सभा का 
गठन िकया, उसी भावना से यह सदन काम कर पा रहा है या नहीं। इस पर आप गौर कीिजए, इस 
पर आप बोिलए।" अब टीका करने से आपके  पाप धुल जाने वाले नहीं हȅ। कोिवड मȂ मरे, शेǹूÊड 
काÎट्स क े साथ, शेǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस क े साथ, मिहलाओं क े साथ आज हर जगह एटर्ोिसटीज़ हो 
रही हȅ। सर, आपने यहाँ तक सुना होगा िक मध्य Ģदेश मȂ एक शेǹूÊड टर्ाइब क े बच्चे क े मुंह मȂ 
मूतर् िकया गया। पहले इन समÎयाओं को सुलझाइए। हमȂ बुिǉ दे रहे हȅ, तो पहले अपनी गवनȄस को 
सुधािरए। इसे छोड़कर आप अपनी मनमानी कर रहे हȅ।  
सर, हम आप
का शुिकर्या भी अदा करते हȅ, क्यȗिक संिवधान Îवीकार िकए जाने क े बाद 
75 साल मȂ आपने चचार् क े िलए दो िदन का टाइम िदया है और हमȂ भी टाइम अलॉट िकया है। 
अगर एकाध घंटा ज्यादा भी हो जाता है, तो भी हमारे लोगȗ को बोलने दीिजए। आपने यह पहले ही 
बोला है, इसिलए मȅ आपका धन्यव
ाद करता हूँ। अगर मȅ ज्यादा टाइम ले लेता हूँ, तो बाकी लोगȗ 
को टाइम नहीं िमलता है, इसिलए मȅ आपसे यह िनवेदन करता हूँ।  
दूसरी बात यह है िक मȅ सबसे पह
ले उन महान नायकȗ को Ǜǉांजिल देता हूँ, िजन्हȗने 
एक समतावादी भारत का सपना देखा था। सभापित जी, Îवाधीनता संगर्ाम क े दौरान ही संिवधान 
िनमार्ण की सोच उपजी थी। यह काँगर्ेस क े इितहास से गहराई से जुड़ा है। 1931 मȂ सरदार पटेल 
की अध्यक्ष
ता मȂ कराची काँगर्ेस अिधवेशन मȂ जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने मूल अिधकारȗ और आिर्थक 
नीित पर ĢÎताव रखा था, जो पािरत हुआ था। यह काँÎटीǷूशन ऐसे ही नह ीं बन गया है, यह 
मूवमȂट से बना है, यह आजादी की लड़ाई से बना है और उसी वƪ, 1931 मȂ ही यह सोच थी। यह 
आज की बात नहीं है। नेहरू  जी ने संिवधान सभा की माँग को 1937 क े चुनाव का क Ȃदर्ीय मुǈा बना 
िदया था। महा
त्मा गाँधी जी ने 25 नवंबर, 1939 को ÎटेटमȂट दी थी। उन्हȗने क्या ÎटेटमȂट दी थी? 
"पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  ने मुझे अन्य बातȗ क े अलावा, संिवधान सभा क े गठबंधन से उत्पन् न 
Ģभावȗ का अध्ययन करने क े िलए िववश िकया है।" मȅ एक और बार पढ़ता हूँ। " पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  ने मुझे अन्य बातȗ क े अलावा, संिवधान सभा क े गठन से उत्पन्न Ģभ ावȗ का 
अध्ययन करने क े िलए िववश िकया है।" यह गाँधी जी ने कहा था। सर, इस संकÊप को पहली बार 
पेश िकया गया था। " मȅने इस िवÌवास क े साथ अपनी संतुिÍट कर ली िक उन्हȂ लोकतंतर् की 
तकनीकी बारीिक
यȗ क े बारे मȂ बेहतर जानकारी है। 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
परंतु मȅ पूणर्तया संशयमुƪ नहीं था, तथािप वाÎतिवक तथ्यȗ ने मेरे सभी संशयȗ को दूर कर िदया 
गया।" यह महात्मा गांधी जी ने पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ कहा था।  उस वƪ िकस 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
ढंग से संिवधान बनाना है और उस पर िकस तरीके  से काम होगा, यह महात्मा गांधी जी ने 
Îवीकार िकया।  लोग पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी को सुबह शाम िकर्िटसाइज करते रहते हȅ।  
इसके  िलए पीछे िकतना काम हुआ, िकतने लोग लड़े,  िकतनी  सलाह दी गईं, यह सब छोड़ो, 
लेिकन अगर महात्मा गांधी जी क े बारे मȂ बोलȂ, तो वह भी नहीं सुनȂगे, नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ बोलȂ, तो 
वह भी नहीं सुनȂगे, बाबा साहेब डा. अंबेडकर क े बारे मȂ बोलȂ, तो वह भी नहीं सुनȂगे, मौलाना 
आजाद क े बारे मȂ बोलȂ, तो वह भी नहीं सुनȂगे, तो आप क्या सुनने वाले हȅ?  आप तोड़-मरोड़ कर 
यहां लोगȗ को समझाने क े िलए आए हो या संिवधान क े ऊपर चचार् करने क े िलए आए हो।   
  सर, संिवध
ान की ĢÎतावना को मȅने अभी पढ़ा है और उसे िफर से पढ़ने की जरूरत  नहीं 
है। इक्वेिलटी, िलबटीर्, ģ ेटरिनटी - यह सब मȅने अभी पढ़ा।  हमȂ इन चीज़ȗ की ही जरूरत है।  
हमारे िलए समानता होनी चािहए, Îव
तंतर्ता होनी चािहए, बंधुत्व Ģेम होना चािहए और न्याय होना 
चािहए।  ये जो चंद शÅद हमारे संिवधान मȂ हȅ और िजनको हम सभी ने Îवीकार िकया है, लेिकन 
इस पर भी आपिǄ हो रही है िक सोशिलज्म क्या है, फलां क्य
ा है?  जबिक यह बात हो रही है िक 
इकोनॉिमक्स पर बात करȂ। नेचुरली वे इकोनॉिमक्स मȂ एक्सपटर् हȅ।  वे जवाहरलाल नेहरू  
यूिनविर्सटी की Îटू डȂट रही हȅ, तो नेचुरली ...(Ëय वधान)...वे जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी की यूिनविर्सटी 
से हȅ और इकोनॉिमक्स मȂ उनकी पढ़ाई हुई है।  उन्हȗने वहां क्या पढ़ा यह मुझे मालूम नहीं है, 
क्यȗिक जवाहरलाल नेहरू  यूिनविर्सटी मȂ िजतने भी Îटू डȂट्स हȅ, वे इत ने Ģोगर्ेिसव हȅ और देश 
बनाने मȂ उनका बहुत बड़ा हाथ है,  चाहे इकोनॉिमक्स मȂ हो, चाहे पॉिलिटकल साइंस मȂ हो, चाहे 
िहÎटर्ी मȂ हो, चाहे एंथर्ोपोलॉजी मȂ हो, चाहे िकसी भी सÅजेक्ट मȂ हो।  उनको दुिनया मȂ बहुत मान-
सÇमान िमलता है।  बहुत से लोग जो  जवाहरलाल नेहरू  यूिनव
िर्सटी से पढ़े हȅ, उन्हȗने दुिनया मȂ 
अपना नाम िकया है और वे डेमोकर्े सी पर बहुत बड़ा िवÌवास रखते हȅ, लेिकन यहां जो डेमोकर्े िटक 
िंथग्स हȅ, उन
को खत्म करने की बात यहां पर हो रही है, यह क ैसी बात है?  आप एक बार िजस 
आइिडयोलॉजी को Îवीकार करते हो, वह बार-बार क ै से बदल जाती है!   …(Ëयवधान)... आप 
बार-बार क ै से बदल देते हो।  मȅ एक ही पाटीर् मȂ हूं और  1969 से आज तक कोई दूसरी पाटीर् नहीं, 
मेरी एक ही पाटीर् है और एक ही िंसबल है।  ...(Ëय
वधान)... पहले गाय और बछड़ा, अब क्या है 
– हाथ।  मȅ कहीं और नहीं गया।   ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, इन को चुप रहने क े िलए भी बोिलए, 
क्यȗिक जब िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी बात कर रही थीं, तो मȅ चुपचाप बैठा था। सर, पता नहीं इनका 
ǭदय पिरवतर्न कब हुआ!  2024 क े चुनाव क े बाद हुआ या उससे पहले हुआ, यह मुझे नहीं मालूम 
है।  आज जब ये कांिÎट
Ƿूशन  की बात कर रहे हȅ, तो यह अभी हुआ या कब हुआ, यह मुझे मालूम 
नहीं है, लेिकन कम से कम उनका ǭदय पिरवतर्न करने का काम इस देश की जनता ने 2024 क े 
इलेक्शन मȂ िकया है। 
 सर, मȅ एक और बात कहना चाहता हूं।  पूरा देश जानता है िक 1949 मȂ आरएसएस क े 
नेताओं ने भारत क े संिव
धान का िवरोध िकया था, क्यȗिक यह मनुÎमृित पर आधािरत संिवधान 
नहीं था।  इस
के  बारे मȂ आरएसएस क े मुखपतर्, 'ऑगर्नाइजर' ने 30 नवंबर, 1949 क े अंक मȂ िवरोध 
करते हुए editorial मȂ यह िलखा था।  आप लोगȗ क े मन मȂ आज भी मनुÎमृित कायम है।  मȅ बार-
बार बोलता रहा, लेिकन आप लोग उÊटा हमारे ऊपर ही इÊज
ाम लगाते रहे।  सभापित जी, न तो 
इन्हȗने संिवधान को Îवीकार िकया, न ितरंगे झंडे को माना।  इसीिलए पहली बार 26 जनवरी , 
2002 को कोटर् क े आदेश पर आरएसएस हेडक्व ाटर्र पर मजबूरी मȂ ितरंगा फहराना पड़ा।  सर, 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
45

 
 
इन्हȗने ितरंगे झंडे को माना, इसीिलए पहली बार 26 जनवरी, 2002 को आरएसएस हेडक्वाटर्र 
पर मजबूरी मȂ ितरंगा फहराना पड़ा, क्यȗिक कोटर् का आदेश था।  चिलए, कम से कम संिवधान की 
विकȊ ग पर चचार् क े िलए तो आपने मान िलया िक अब हम सभी लोग ितरंगे क े नीचे ही काम करȂगे।   
 सभापित जी, हमारा संिवधान भारत क े हर Ëयिƪ को शिƪशाली बनाता है।  यह गरीब 
और कमजोरȗ की आवाज है; सǄा का नैित
क मागर्दशर्क है; इसमȂ जाित, पंथ, िंलग या आिर् थक 
आधार पर भेदभाव करने की गुंजाइश नहीं है, लेिकन संिवधान पर खतरा बना हुआ है।  आने वाली 
पीिढ़यȗ क े िलए इसे सहेज कर रखने क े िलए हमȂ लगातार चौकन्ना रहना पड़ेगा, सतकर् रहना 
पड़ेगा, क्यȗिक इनकी मंशा कब बदलती है, क्या होती है, मालूम नहीं है।  70 साल पहले िजन 
लोगȗ ने अपनी पाटीर् की Îथापना की थी और इनका जो main supporter है, आरएसएस, ये सब 
लोग इसके  िखलाफ बोलते गए, लेिक
न कम से कम उनको अब देश को सुरिक्षत रखने की, एक 
रखने की बुिǉ देश क े लोगȗ ने दी है।  इसिलए मȅ आपकी ओर से उनकी बदल
ती हुई नीितयȗ क े 
िलए और वे जो सÇमान कॉिन्ÎटǷूशन को दे रहे हȅ, जो सÇमान झंडे को दे रहे हȅ, जो सÇमान देश 
क े लोगȗ को दे रहे हȅ, उस
के  िलए उनको भी धन्यवाद देता हूं।  कॉिन्ÎटǷूएंट असȂबली ने जो ये 
सारी चीजȂ बनाई हȅ, उनकी भी याद आपको अब आ रही है।  इससे पहले उनको याद ही नहीं था, 
वे सब ड ू ब गए थे।  
 सर, जब बहुत से शिƪशाली देशȗ मȂ universal adult franchise नहीं  था, मिहलाओं को 
वोट का हक नहीं था, तब भारत मȂ मिहलाओं समेत सभी को universal adult franchise का 
अिधकार अगर िकसी ने िदया, तो वह कांगर्ेस ने िदया, संिव धान ने िदया।  सर, आपको तो मालूम 
है, आपने भी िकतने देशȗ क े कॉिन्ÎटǷूशंस पढ़े हȗगे, चाहे ऑÎटर्ेिलया हो, अमेिरका हो, 
यूनाइटेड िंकगडम हो, ģांस हो, वहां पर वे democracy की बहुत बातȂ करते थे, लेिकन 
democracy क े साथ, संिवधान क े सा
थ मिहलाओं को वोिंटग की पावर नहीं िमली थी।  यह एक 
ही देश ऐसा है, जहां िजस िदन हमȂ आजादी िमली, संिवधान का implementation हुआ, उस िदन 
से adult franchise सबको िमला।  गरीब, अमीर, काम करने वाले लोग, मजदूर, िक सान, यह 
सबको िमला।  सर, यह िकसकी देन है?  क्या यह नेहरू  जी की देन नहीं है, क्या यह अंबेडकर 
जी की देन नहीं है, क्या यह कॉिन्ÎटǷूएंट असȂबली की देन नहीं है?   कॉिन्ÎटǷूएंट असȂबली मȂ 
इनके  जो मेÇबसर् थे, वे सब िचÊलाते रहते थे।  मȅने वह पूरी documentary देखी है, आप भी 
देिखए।  वह कॉिन्ÎटǷूएंट असȂबली की 10 घंटे  की documentary है।  अगर आप देखȂगे, तो 
आपको पता चलेगा िक उस वƪ कौन-कौन, क्या-क्या बोले हȅ। 
 िकस क्लॉज़ पर िकसने क्य
ा बात रखी है, िकस आिर्टकल पर िकतनी बहस हुई है।  अगर 
जरा उसे देखȂ, तो मालूम होता है िक कामथ जी ने क्या बोला, फलां साहब ने क्या बोला और 
जनसंघ क े हमारे नेता क्य
ा बोले।  यह सब उससे मालूम होता है।  इसिलए आप जरा वह देख 
लीिजए, वह उनको िदखाइए, तो बहुत अच्छा होगा।  वह भी तो राज्य सभा की देन है, क्यȗिक वह 
डॉक्यूमȂट उसने ही बनाया है। उसके  बाद वह भी देिखए, जो पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी का 
िडÎकवरी ऑफ इंिडया है।  वह 40 घंटे का है।  अगर आप एक बार वह भी देखȂगे तो आप
को मालूम 
होगा िक दुिनया पहले क ैसी थी, िंहदुÎतान क ैसा था, क्या सामािजक समानता थी और बाद मȂ हम 
िकस ढंग से इतने िसिवलाइज्ड होकर काम कर रहे हȅ।  ये सारी चीजȂ आप उसमȂ देखȂगे। 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
आगर्नाइज़र मȂ 1951-52 क े चुनावȗ क े दौरान यूिनवसर्ल अडÊट ģ Ȃचाइज क े िखलाफ 
िलखा गया।  यह तो सही है!  इसमȂ पंिडत नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ बोला गया है।  उन्हȗने अडÊट 
ģ Ȃचाइज क े बारे मȂ 1951-52 मȂ कहा िक  "Pandit Nehru would live to co nfess the failure of 
universal adult franchise in India."  … (Interruptions)…   Shall I read it again?  "Pandit 
Nehru would live to confess the failure of universal adult franchise in India." 
 यूिनवसर्ल एडÊट ģ Ȃचाइज क े तहत मिहलाओं को जो वोिंटग का राइट िमलता था, जो 
शूदर्ȗ को वोिंटग का राइट िमलता था, जो गरीब लोगȗ को वोिंटग का राइट िमलता था, इसके  बारे 
मȂ अगर िकसी ने अपोज़ िकया, तो आरएसएस क े लोगȗ ने िकया, जनसंघ क े इन लोगȗ ने िकया 
और आज ये हमको पाठ पढ़ाते हȅ!  उन्हȗने आगे कहा िक इसका सत्यानाश होना खुद पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी देखȂगे।   आप सब यूिनवसर्ल एडÊट ģ Ȃचाइज मȂ वोट देकर आये हȅ।  आपने 
िदया है या नहीं?  आप उसी की वजह से वोट भी ले रहे हȅ।  तो मुझे यह कहना है िक जो बातȂ, जो 
अच्छी बातȂ पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  की थीं, गांधी जी की थीं और दूसरे नेताओं की थीं, उन 
सबको िछपा-िछपा क े कट एंड पेÎट िकया, जो अच्छी लगती हȅ, उनको पढ़ा। हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी ने लोक सभा मȂ जो कहा था, मȅने उनकी भी पूरी Îपीच देखी है, लेिकन मȅ उस पर यह ाँ िटÃपणी 
नहीं करना चाहता। मȅने राजनाथ िंसह जी की भी Îपीच देखी।  उनको देखने क े बाद मुझे ऐसा 
महसूस हुआ िक वे वहाँ जो क ु छ भी क्वोट कर रहे थे, वे सब क्वोट्स, जो कांÎटीचुएंट असȂबली मȂ 
बाबा साहेब डा. भीमराव अंबेडकर ने बोला था, उसमȂ से थे।  दूसरे  नेताओं ने भी वही क्वोट िकया।  
इनकी िदल की बात बाह
र नहीं आई िक वे खुद इस संिवधान को चाहते हȅ या नहीं चाहते हȅ। हमको 
िकर्िटसाइज करने क े िलए, टीका कर
ने क े िलए, कौन से paras, कौन से शÅद Ģयोग करना है, 
उतना उठाकर वे बोलते गए, लेिकन आपने क्या िकया, वह बोला ही नहीं, आपने देश क े िलए क्या 
िकया, वह बोला ही नहीं, आप िकतनी बार जेल गए, वह बो ला ही नहीं, आपने देश क े िलए 
िकतनी पीड़ा को सहन िकया, यह नहीं कहा। जो लोग देश क े िलए लड़े नहीं, उनको आजादी का 
महत्व क्या मालूम होगा और संिवधान का महत्व क्या मालूम होगा?  िजन्हȗने पसीना बहाया, जो 
घर छोड़कर चले गए, िव
Ǐा अिर्जत करते रहे, ऐसे लोग, आज उनके  बारे मȂ – उनके  Îवगर्वासी 
होने क े बाद आप उनकी बात करते हȅ!  …(Ëयवधान)… आप चुप बैिठए।  आप अभी अपने िडफȂ स 
िमिनÎटर क े पास जाकर सीख कर आइए।   
 सर, आज हमȂ इंटर्ोÎपेक्शन करना चािहए िक हमने क्या िक
या, क्या करना है और हमने 
जो वादे िकए थे, उनका क्या हुआ, लेिकन वे हमȂ बोले।  मȅने Ģाइम िमिनÎटर साहब का Îपीच पढ़ा।  
वे हमȂ िसखा रहे थे िक ये जुमले वाले हȅ और ये असत्य बोलते हȅ। उन्
हȗने ऐसा बोला, जबिक 
असत्य बोलने मȂ नंबर वन तो वे ही हȅ।  उन्हȗने 15 लाख रुपए  देने क े बात की थी और लोग अभी भी 
उसका इंतज
ार कर रहे हȅ, लेिकन यह नहीं िमल रहा है।  लोगȗ को 2 करोड़ रोजगार देने की बात 
की। क्या यह असत्य है या सच है? उन्हȗने िकसानȗ की एमएसपी डबल करने की बात की।  क्या ये 
सब िमला? 
 
Ǜी सभापित : आपका मतलब असत्य है, क्यȗिक *अनपािर्लयामȂटरी है।  
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
47

 
 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, यह असत्य है, घोर असत्य है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : पर 
* नहीं है।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ अपनी गलती को Îवीकार करता हूँ।  * शÅद का यूज़ नहीं करना 
है, क्यȗिक यह अनपािर्लयामȂटरी है,  जै सा िक आपने बताया और यह है  भी,  तो   मȅने   उसको    
छोड़    िदया।  ये    लोग    बार-बार    बोले।  आपने Ǜीमती सीतारमण जी का भाषण गौर से सुना।  
उन्हȗने यह कहा िक it is a * .  * is unparliamentary. अनटर्ूथ और टर्ूथ - ये शÅद यूज़ करना है, 
लेिकन आपने उनको अलाउ कर िदया और मुझे टोक िदया।   
सर, वे ऐसी बात बोले, लेिकन उन्हȗने खुद ऐसे Îलोगन्स िदए, जो जुमले हȅ और वे हमारे 
ऊपर जुमलȗ का इÊजाम लगा रहे हȅ।  ये जुमले वाले लोग देश को ĥिम त कर रहे हȅ और असत्य 
बातȂ बोलकर लोगȗ को * दे रहे हȅ और िफर यहां पर आकर ऐसे बोल देते हȅ, जैसे िक कन्नड़ मȂ 
एक बोल है िक अगर िकसी असत्य बात को सौ बार  बोला जाए, तो वह सत्य क े रूप  मȂ माना जा 
सकता है।  गोएबÊस जो असत्य बातȂ करते थे, उससे भी सौ गुना ये लोग करते हȅ और िफर हमȂ 
कहते हȅ िक आप लोगȗ ने क्या िकया, इमरजȂसी मȂ क्या िकया, फलां मȂ क्या िकया, नेहरू  जी ने 
िकतनी बार ऐसा िकया।  मȅ बताता हूँ िक नेहरू  जी ने क्या िकया, क ै से िकया और पहला अमȂडमȂट 
क्यȗ करना पड़ा।  यह िक
स वजह से हुआ।  वह मȅ बताऊं गा। 
सर, मोदी साहब का भाषण एक घंटा 50 िमनट  का हुआ, हमारे फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर का 
भाषण एक घंटा 10 िमनट का हुआ।  उन को घंटȗ बात करने की पहले से Ģैिक्टस है, क्यȗिक जब वे 
बजट पेश करती हȅ, तो उस वƪ भी वे बोलती हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
सर, पीएम साहब या तो अतीत मȂ रहते हȅ या कÊपना लोक मȂ।  ऐसा लग ता है िक वतर्मान 
उनकी िडक्शनरी मȂ नहीं है।  बेहतर होता िक वे यह बता देते िक उन्हȗने 11 साल मȂ ऐसा कौन सा 
काम िकया है, िजससे हमारा लोकतंतर् और संिवधान मजबूत हुआ।  िडमोनेटाइजेशन   हो   या   
दूसरा   क ु छ   हो, उन्हȗने  सब खत्म करने की ही बात की
।  उन्हȗने गरीबȗ को आिर्थक दृिÍट से 
क ुचला।  ऐसे लोग हमȂ पाठ पढ़ा रहे हȅ िक आिर्थक मजबूती हमने की।  अगर हम सोिशयोिलįम की 
बात करȂ, तो आपने उस पर भी टीका िकया है।   
 सभापित जी, अगर लȅड िरफॉÇसर् नहीं आता, बȅकȗ का नेशनलाइजेशन नहीं होता, फ ू ड 
िसक्योिरटी एक्ट नहीं आता, नरेगा नहीं आता, तो आज गरीब मरते रहते।  कोिवड मȂ आपको जो 
आǛय िमला, वह नरेगा से िमला, वह फ ू ड िसक्योिरटी से िमला और कÇपलसरी एजुक ेशन एक्ट 
क े तहत बच्चȗ की आज जो पढ़ाई हो रही है, यह काम है।  यह नहीं िक बात-बात मȂ िकसी भी बात 
पर टोको।  वे भाषण देते हȅ, लेिकन उसका पिरणाम क्या है,  क ु छ नहीं और यह बात वे हमेशा 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
 
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
कहते हȅ िक इससे हमारा लोकतंतर् और संिवधान मजबूत हुआ है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने एक बार िफर 
सदन और देश को गुमराह करने की कोिशश की।  सर, यह ज़रा सुिनए।  उन्हȗने कहा िक 1947 
से 1952 क े बीच मȂ कोई इलेक्टेड सरकार नहीं थी और वे गैर-कानूनी संशोधन ला रहे थे।  यह 
मोदी साहब का कहना है।  मȅ मोदी साहब की याददाÌत क े िलए िरपीट कर रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक देश 
की आजादी मȂ न उन्हȗने िहÎसा िलया और न मȅने िहÎसा िलया।  उसमȂ नेहरू  जी, महात्मा गांधी 
जी और सरदार पटेल जी ने िहÎसा िलया था और उन लोगȗ ने जो काम िकया, उस पर िटÃपणी 
करने का हमको कोई अिधकार नहीं है।  दूसरा, उन्हȗने नेहरू  जी, पटेल जी, बाबा साहेब और 
खुद अपने Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् जी की कर् ेिडिबिलटी पर हमला बोला, क्यȗिक वे ऐसे लोगȗ की 
बात कर रहे थे, िजनको उन्हȗने कभी सुना नहीं, कभी देखा नहीं, उनके  साथ कभी लड़े नहीं।  
आप नेहरू  जी क े िखलाफ नफरत मȂ इतना बह गए िक आपने संिवधान सभा, अंतिरम सरकार 
और अंतिरम संसद, इन सब पर सवाल खड़ा कर िदया और इन सभी मȂ Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् जी  
भी  थे।  इसीिलए, आपको बोलते वƪ जरा यह तो सोचना चािहए िक क्या मȅ अपने नेता क े 
िखलाफ बोल रहा हूँ, क्या नेहरू  जी क े िखलाफ बोल रहा हूँ या िकसी और क े िखलाफ बोल रहा 
हूँ!  अगर वे इतना सोचकर बोलते तो अच्छा होता, लेिकन मȅ समझता हूँ िक नैचुरली उन्हȗने रात 
मȂ जो भी पढ़ा, वह सुबह बोला होगा।  वे भूल गए हȗगे या उनके  जो भी एडवाइजर हȅ, उन्हȗने जो 
िलखकर िदया होगा, उसे उन्हȗने बोला होगा।  हमȂ अपनी गलितयाँ दुरुÎत कर लेनी चािहए, चाहे 
वे मोदी जी हȗ, चाहे नƿा जी हȗ या चाहे मȅ हूँ।  जब तक हम अपनी गलती को Îवीकार नहीं करȂगे, 
तब तक आपकी बातȗ मȂ कोई वजन नहीं रहेगा।  
दूसरी चीज़, Ģधान मंतर्ी ने यह भी कहा िक 1951 मȂ जब चुनी हुई सरकार नहीं थी, तब 
नेहरू  जी ने अध्यादेश लाकर संिवधान को बदला।  सर, आप यह सुिनए।  ये उनके  ही words हȅ, 
जो मुझे Ģेस मȂ िमला और उसकी कच्ची कॉपी िमली।   मȅ उनसे पूछना चाहता हूँ िक वह क्यȗ लाया 
गया?  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी शायद भूल गए िक संिवधान का पहला संशोधन Ģोिवजनल पािर्लयामȂट ने 
िकया था, िजसके  सदÎय संिवधान सभा क े ही सदÎय including Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् जी थे।  यह 
संशोधन इसिलए हुआ था, तािक िपछड़ी जाितयȗ को आरक्षण िदया जाए और जमींदारी का 
अबोिलशन हो सके ।  मȅ सदन को बताना चाहता हूँ िक उस दौरान State of Madras v. 
Champakam Dorairajan क े मामले मȂ मदर्ास Îटेट क े िरजवȃशन क े फ ैसले को सुĢीम कोटर् ने 
खािरज कर िदया था। आप बोल रहे हȅ, ये एससी-एसटी का िरजवȃशन ...(Ëयवधान)...  उन्हȗने 
िकया, लेिकन सुĢीम कोटर् ने उस िरजवȃशन को खत्म करने का फ ैसला िदया।  
 उस वƪ आिर्टकल 15(4) आ गया। आप नेहरू  जी क े ऊपर Åलेम करते हȅ िक नेहरू  जी ने 
ऐसा िकया। सर, यह तो बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर जी का सजेशन था, सरदार वÊलभभाई पटेल 
जी का सजेशन था। उन्
हȗने कहा िक यह जो land reforms का है और बाद मȂ 9th शेǹूल  को 
इसमȂ जोड़ा गया। इसके  पीछे यह मंशा थी िक एससी, एसटी और ओबीसी को एजुक ेशन और 
इÇÃलॉयमȂट मȂ आरक्षण िमल सके । इस संशोधन का तीसरा पक्ष सांĢदाियक दुÍĢचार को रोकना भी 
था। सरदार पटेल जी ने 3 जुलाई, 1950 को इस बा रे मȂ पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी को िवÎतार 
से पतर् िलख कर संिवधान संशोधन को ही समÎया का हल बताया। सर, मȅ एक बार और बोल दूं, 
क्यȗिक यह आवाज़ Ģाइम िमिनÎटर साहब तक जानी चािहए।  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
49

 
 
 महोदय, सरदार वÊलभभाई पटेल ने 3 जुलाई, 1950 को इस बारे मȂ पंिडत जवाहरलाल 
नेहरू  जी को िवÎतार से पतर् िलख कर संिवधान संशोधन को ही समÎया का हल  बताया। 
‘Amendment is the only remedy.’ Th is is suggested by Sardar Patel. आप उनका भी 
अपमान करते हȅ। सरदार वÊलभभाई पटेल जी ने अपने पतर् मȂ कहा था, "As you say, we have 
involved ourselves in so many legal and constitutional difficulties that 
we do not know 
how to overcome them. My own feeling is th at very soon we shall have to sit down 
and consider constitutional amendments." यह िकसने कहा! यह सरदार वÊलभभाई पटेल 
जी ने कहा था। आप उनकी भी insult कर रहे हȅ। पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी क े नाम पर सभी 
की insult कर रहे हȅ। वे जोश मȂ आकर बोलते हȅ िक नेहरू  जी ने ये िक या, नेहरू  जी ने वह िकया। 
नेहरू  जी जो करना चाहते थे, उसमȂ सरदार पटेल जी उनके  साथ थे, अÇबेडकर जी भी उनके  
साथ थे। एससी, एसटी, बैकवडर् को एजुक ेशन और इÇÃलॉय मȂट क े िलए, जो उनको यहां मार पड़ी 
थी, उसको ठीक करने क े िलए वे अमȂडमȂट लाए। वह पहला अमȂडमȂट था। अगर यह पहला 
अमȂडमȂट देश क े िलए नहीं था, शोिषतȗ क े िलए नहीं था, तभी आप कह सकते हȅ। वे कहते हȅ िक 
अपने िलए लाए – आप बताइए इस
मȂ कहां है? ये शÅद मेरे नहीं हȅ, ये सरदार पटेल जी क े शÅद 
हȅ। सभापित महोदय, इसिलए मुख्य मंितर्यȗ को नेहरू  जी ने पतर् िलखा था, िजसका िज़कर् मोदी 
जी ने अपने भाषण मȂ नेहरू  जी को बदनाम करने क े िलए तथ्य
ȗ को तोड़-मरोड़ कर िकया। इसके  
िलए उनको देश से माफी मांगनी चािहए। यह मेरी िडमांड है। अगर देश क े सामने सत्य को तोड़-
मरोड़ कर रखते हȅ और बदनाम करने की क
ोिशश करते हȅ, तो इसके  िलए उन्हȂ इस सदन मȂ और 
उस सदन मȂ भी माफी मांगनी चािहए, देश की जनता से माफी मांगनी चािहए। आप पढ़Ȃ तो ये चीज़Ȃ 
िमलती हȅ, िडबेट मȂ िमलती हȅ, लेिक न िफर भी आप लोगȗ को गुमराह करते हȅ। इस संशोधन को 
खुद बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर ने दो घंटे सदन मȂ िडफȂ ड िकया था। सर, मȅ एक बार और पढ़ दूं। 
इस संशोधन को खुद बा
बा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर ने सदन मȂ दो घंटे िडफȂ ड िकया था। मȅ पूछना 
चाहता हूं िक मोदी जी को िकस पर एतराज़ है, क्या एससी/एसटी पर है, क्या ओबीसी पर है, 
क्या आरक्षण पर है, उन्हȂ िकनके  ऊपर एतराज़ है?     
 उनके  आरक्षण को सुरिक्षत रखने क े िलए, उनके  rights िदलान े क े िलए अगर पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी amendment कराते हȅ, तो क्या वे दिलतȗ क े िखलाफ हो गए, SCs, STs
 
क े िखलाफ हो गए, आिदवािसयȗ क े िखलाफ हो गए?  मȅ पूछना चाहता हूं िक क्यȗ ऐसी बातȂ 
करके  लोगȗ क े मन मȂ असत्य बातȂ बैठा रहे हो।  आप Prime Minister हȅ और हम लोग आपकी 
इज्जत करते हȅ, लेिकन ऐसी असत्य बातȂ जनता क े बीच लेकर गए, तो इससे देश को बहुत 
नुकसान होगा।  सर, मȅ land refo
rms क े बारे मȂ क ु छ कहना चाहता हूं। आप बड़े िकसान हȅ या 
छोटे िकसान हȅ, यह मुझे नहीं पता है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपसे क्षमा चाहता हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : खरगे जी, मȅ क ृषक पुतर् हूं। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: आप क ृषक नहीं हȅ।  मोदी जी को िक
स पर एतराज है? क्या गरीब िकसानȗ 
को जमीन का मािलकाना हक िमलने पर उनको एतराज है, क्या land reforms आना, िजसके  
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िलए वे गरीबȗ की तरफ से लड़ रहे थे, तो क्या उससे एतराज है, सरदार पटेल जी से नाराजगी है 
क्या? हम कहते हȅ िक बीजेपी आरक्षण की िवरोधी है, इसिलए वह caste census क े िखलाफ  है।   
महोदय, देश क े Îवाधीनता आंदोलन क े बारे मȂ मोदी जी को ज्यादा पता नहीं है, इसिलए वे इस 
िवषय पर जाना नहीं चाहते हȅ, क्यȗिक वे उस सफर मȂ शािमल ही नहीं हुए थे। …(Ëयवधा
न)… 1946 
क े Cabinet Mission Plan क े तहत Congress ने Executive Council मȂ नेहरू  जी को Vice-
President बनाया था।  इसिलए उन्हȗने 1947 मȂ अंतिरम सरकार का नेतृत्व िकया।  देश का पहला 
आम चुनाव 1951-52 मȂ हुआ, िजसमȂ नेहरू  जी Ģधान मंतर्ी बने।  तब उस वƪ सरदार पटेल जी 
इस दुिनया  मȂ नहीं थे।  इसके  बाद 1964 तक लगातार नेहरू  जी Ģधान मंतर्ी बने रहे।  मोदी जी 
जैसे लोगȗ क े िलए ही सरदार पटेल ǎारा 14
 नवंबर, 1950 मȂ नेहरू  जी क े जन्मिदन पर िलखे गए 
बधाई पतर् मȅ आपके  सामने पढ़कर सुनाता हूं। यिद आपकी इजाज़त हो।  " क ु छ Îवाथर्Ģेिरत लोगȗ 
ने हमारे िवषय मȂ ĥांित
यां फ ैलाने की कोिशश की है  और क ु छ भोले Ëयिƪ उन पर िवÌवास भी 
करते हȅ।" यह खुद  सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल जी ने िलखा है।  "लेिकन वाÎतव मȂ हम लोग 
आजीवन सहकिर्मयȗ और बंधुओं की भांित साथ काम करते हȅ।  अवसर की मांग क े अनुसार हम
ने 
परÎपर एक-दूसरे क े दृिÍटकोण क े अनुसार अपने को बदला है और एक-दूसरे क े मतभेदȗ का भी 
सÇमान िकया है, जैसा िक गहरा िवÌ
वास होने पर ही िकया जाता है।" 
यह सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल जी ǎारा नेहरू  जी क े जन्मिदन पर  िलखा हुआ पतर्  है, 
लेिकन ये आज उनमȂ झगड़ा लगाने की कोिशश करते हȅ।  आज कहते हȅ िक वÊलभ भाई पटेल 
नहीं चाहते थे, नेहरू  जी वैसे थे।  आप उनके  खुद क े भाषण पिढ़ए।  उन्हȗने क्या letters
 िलखे हȅ, 
वे पिढ़ए, गांधी जी ने क्या बोला, वह पिढ़ए, लेिकन उनको पढ़ने क े बजाय RSS training मȂ जो 
होता है, उसको यहां पर बोलने से फायदा नहीं है। 
 आप यहाँ संिवधान की बात क
ीिजए। आप िजन पर टीका-िटÃपणी करते हȅ, उन नेहरू  जी 
का पतर् देिखए, वÊलभभाई पटेल जी का पतर् देिखए, महात्मा गाँधी जी का पतर् देिखए िक उन्हȗने 
संिवधान बनाने क े िलए आिखर मȂ क ैसा फ ैसला िलया था। अगर आप यह सब देखने क े बाद क ु छ 
कहते, तो मȅ समझता िक आप हमȂ बहुत ज्ञान दे रहे हȅ। हम छोटे-मोटे Îकू लȗ से पढ़कर आए हȅ, 
हमȂ यहाँ पर बहुत बड़ा ज्ञान िमल रहा है – हम ऐसा सोचते, लेिकन आप वह सब छोड़क
र टीका-
िटÃपणी कर रहे हȅ, जबिक मȅ आपके  सामने सही और पूरे डॉक्यूमȂट्स पेश कर रहा हूं।   
सभापित जी, रक्षा मंतर्ी जी ने लोक सभा मȂ बोलते हुए संिवध
ान बनाने क े Ǜेय को लेकर 
कांगर्ेस पर कटाक्ष िकया िक इनका क्या Ǜेय बनता है? बाबा साहेब ने खुद कहा था और मȅ इसको 
क्वोट करूं गा,   "The task of the Drafting Committee would have been a very difficult 
one if this Constituent Assembly has been merely a motley crowd.  There would have 
been nothing but chaos.  This possibility of  chaos was reduced to nil by the existence 
of Congress party inside the Assembly whic h brought into its proceedings a sense of 
order and discipline."  यह बाबा साहेब ने कहा था।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर 
ने कहा था, लोगȗ ने सुना था और यह Constituent Assembly की िडबेट मȂ नमूद हुआ है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने यह ओपनली कहा था, लेिकन आप उस पर भी टीका-िटÃपणी करते हȅ िक 
बाबा साहेब का सÇमान नहीं िकया, लेिकन आप तो िबगिंनग से ही उनका सÇमान नह ीं कर रहे हȅ। 
उन्हȗने खुद यह Constituent Assembly मȂ कहा था। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप तो उनके  िखलाफ थे। 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
51

 
 
सर, मुझे बीच मȂ एक बात याद आई है, क्या मȅ वह बात बोल सकता हूं? जब यहाँ पर संिवधान मȂ 
ितरंगा झंडा Îवीकृ त हो गया,  कांÎटीǷूशन Îवीकृ त हो गया, तब बीजेपी वालȗ, िंहदू महासभा 
वालȗ और आरएसएस वालȗ ने मुंबई रेलवे Îटेशन पर जाकर सैफरन झंडा िदखाया। उस वƪ 
बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने कहा था। ...(Ëयवधान)... जनसंघ, तुÇहारा पहला अवतार। हमारे धमर् मȂ 
िजस Ģकार से दस अवतार होते हȅ, उसी Ģकार से वह तुÇहारा पहला और दूसरा अवतार है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप उसको छोड़ दीिजए। सर, जब उनको झंडा िदया, तब बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर 
ने कहा, 'क्या मȅ यह सैफरन झंडे को देखने क े  िलए आया हूं? मेरा झंडा अलग है – ितरंगा झंडा 
और यह देश का झंडा रहेगा। यह काम नहीं चलेगा, Ãलीज़ हिटए।'  वे उन्हȂ हटाकर आगे चले गए। 
महोदय, यह घटना मुंबई रेलवे Îटेशन पर घटी थी, लेिकन आज ये बोलते हȅ िक अÇबेडकर नेहरू  
जी क े िखलाफ थे और संिवधान बनाते वƪ उन्हȂ सÇमान नहीं िदया था। बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने 
खुद कहा था िक यह जो मुझे सÇमान िमला है, वह कांगर्ेस की वजह से है। मȅ कांगर्ेस की वजह से 
यह मसौदा  बना सका और वह भी Îमूदली बना सका। उस वƪ िकसी ने भी इसे िडÎटबर् नहीं 
िकया।  
सभापित जी, मȅ आपसे एक और िवन
ती करूं गा। आगे चलकर उन्हȗने यह भी कहा, "The 
Congress Party is, therefore, entitled to all the credit for the smooth sailing of the draft 
Constitution in the Assembly." यह उनका कहना था। सभापित जी, अगर वे दुखी होते, तो 
क्या बोलते नहीं? ये लोग कहीं की बात कहीं कर
ते हȅ। जब बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर अपोिजशन 
पाटीर् मȂ थे, तब वे Scheduled Castes Federation क े ĢेिसडȂट थे।  
 हमारे बȂगलुरु  क े बैिरÎटर जोगȂदर् नाथ मंडल सेकर् ेटरी थे, तो नेचुरली उनकी पाटीर् अलग 
थी। जब उन्हȂ वहाँ से हा
र िमल गई, तब जोगȂदर् नाथ मंडल जी ने सेकर् ेटरी, वेÎट बंगाल से 
रेिजग्नेशन दे िदया। राजीनामा देने क े बाद उनकी सीट से बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर चुनकर आए, 
आपकी मेहरबानी से नहीं आए। आप लोग बढ़ा-चढ़
ा कर बोल रहे हȅ। आप तो उनके  िखलाफ थे। 
जो आपके  जनसंघ क े नेता थे - ÌयामाĢसाद मुखजीर् जी, वे भी वहीं से चुनकर आए थे। 
ÌयामाĢसाद मुखजीर् जी का नाम जÊदी याद नहीं आता है, क्यȗिक उनका ज्यादा नाम िलया नहीं 
है। उन्
हȂ याद रहता होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... लेने क े टाइम पर लȂगे ही, जैसे अब ले रहा हूँ। चेयरमैन 
साहब, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से इस देश को बताना चाहता हूँ िक संिव
धान सभा मȂ काँगर्ेस क े 
पास Ģचंड बहुमत था। बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर को डर्ािंÄटग किमटी का चेयरमैन चुना गया। बाबा 
साहेब ने अपने 25 नवंबर, 1950 क े भाषण मȂ खुद कहा था िक "मुझे बहुत आÌचयर् हुआ।" सर, 
आप उधर देख रहे हȅ, इसिलए मेरी बा
त आप तक क ै से पहुंचेगी? 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मȅ 99 परसȂट आप ही को देख रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: लेिकन एक परसȂट ही बहुत इÇपॉटȄट है। सौ बना
ने क े िलए एक परसȂट 
जरूरी होता है। तȂदुलकर जी ने दस बार 99 रन मारे, लेिकन सȂचुरी नहीं हो सकी, इसीिलए मȅ 
आपसे िवनती करता हूँ। यह बहुत महत्वपूणर् मुǈा है।  मुझे बहुत आÌचयर् हुआ था, जब डर्ािंÄटग 
किमटी ने मुझे अपना अध्यक्ष चुना। सिमित मȂ मुझसे बड़े, मुझसे बेहतर, मुझसे सक्षम कई लोग थे। 
सबको पता है िक जब आजादी िम
ली, तब देश मȂ सूई भी नहीं बनती थी, खाने क े िलए कोई 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
अनाज नहीं था, क ेवल 35 साल की औसत उĦ थी, लेिकन िपछले 60-70 सालȗ मȂ देश ने बहुत 
तरक्की की है। आप बोलते हȅ िक 55 सालȗ मȂ आपने क्या िकया, 70 साल मȂ क्या िकया! अगर हम 
नहीं करते, तो आप लोग यहाँ इंजीिनयर बनकर नहीं बैठते, डॉक्टर बनकर नहीं बैठते, मोदी जी 
इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी भी नहीं बनते और मȅ एक मजदूर का बेटा अप
ोिजशन लीडर भी नहीं 
बनता। आप यह सोच कर रिखए। आप अपने आप को तीस मार खां मत समिझए। यह सब पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी, महा
त्मा गाँधी जी, डॉक्टर अÇबेडकर जी, वÊलभभाई पटेल जी की देन है। 
इसमȂ आपका कोई क ंटर्ीÅयूशन नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... नेहरू  जी ने आधुिनक भारत की नींव रखी। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आप हमारी पाटीर् मȂ आएंगे, तो देखȂगे। ...(Ëयवधा न)... सर, नेहरू  जी ने आधुिनक 
भारत की नींव रखी। शाÎतर्ी जी ने हिरत कर्ांित की बुिनयाद रखी। इंिदरा जी ने देश को परमाणु 
शिƪ से संपन्न बनाया, सामािजक न्याय क े िलए 20 सूतर्ी कायर्कर्म िदया और बȅकȗ का 
राÍटर्ीयक
रण िकया। राजीव जी संचार कर्ांित लेकर आए और पंचायती राज एवं लोकल बॉडीज़ का 
आधार बनाया, िजसको नरिसÇहा राव जी ने 73वȂ और 74वȂ संिवधान संशोधन... ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपको बधाई दे रहे हȅ। ...(Ëय वधान)...  
  
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: वे काँगर्ेस क े Ģधान मंतर्ी थे। ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरी और उनकी पहचान 
हैदराबाद से थी। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित : आपको बधाई दे रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: मȅ यह कह रहा हूँ िक 73वाँ और 74वाँ अमȂडमȂट, जो राजीव गाँधी जी का 
सपना था, िजसे उन्हȗने तैयार िक
या था, उसे आगे लाया गया। 
 आज मिहलाओं को जो िरजवȃशन िमल रहा है, चाहे वह मेयर क े िलए हो, पंचायत मȂ हो, 
िजला पंचाय
त अध्यक्ष क े िलए हो - यह सब जो िमल रहा है, यह कांगर्ेस की वजह से िमल रहा है।  
कांगर्ेस ही इस संबंध मȂ एक्ट लाई थी। कहा गया िक मिहलाओं क े िलए क्य ा  िकया गया।  मिहलाओं 
क े िलए यह िकया गया - उनको अध्यक्ष बनाया गया, मेयर बनाया गया, पंचायत मȂबसर् बनाया 
गया, तालुका पंचायत मȂबसर् बनाया गया।  अगर हमारी सǄा आएगी, तो हम आपसे भी तेजी से 
मिहलाओं क े आरक्षण िबल को इिÇÃलमȂट करȂगे।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   हर ची ज़ एक ही िदन मȂ नहीं 
होती है।  तुम लोगȗ ने उस समय अपोज िकया था।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मनमोहन िंसह जी ने हिरत 
सुधारȗ का काम िकया।  Ģधान मंतर्ी की आधारहीन बातȗ से इितहास बदल नहीं सकता है, जो 
सत्य है, वह सत्य है और जो असत्य है, वह असत्य है।   इसीिलए वह कम से कम अप
ना ध्यान 
इधर रखȂ।  हम फजीर् आंकड़ȗ की नीित नहीं करते हȅ।  अगर मȅ कांगर्ेस सरकार की असली 
उपलिÅधयां बताने लगूंगा, तो इसके  िलए आपके  पास समय नह ीं है।  मुझे भी बहुत क ु छ बोलना है, 
मȅ उसमȂ से थोड़ा तो जरूर  बोलूंगा, क्यȗिक वहां से लोगȗ ने दुिनया को असत्य बातȗ को सही 
बताने की कोिशश की, लेिकन हम उनसे डरने वाले नहीं हȅ।  हम उǄर का Ģत्युǄर दȂगे और 
सत्यता पर आधािरत उǄर दȂगे। 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
53

 
 
सर, संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 15 क े तहत धमर्, नÎल, जाित, िंलग या जन्म Îथान क े आधार 
पर भेदभाव को रोका गया है, लेिकन आज क्या क ु छ घट रहा है, यह सबको पता है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी 
इंिदरा गांधी जी ने चैलȂज को चैलȂज समझा, क्यȗिक वे 42nd अमȂडमȂट लेकर आईं, िजसके  तहत 
सोशिलज्म और सैक्युलिरज्म को ĢीएÇबल मȂ जोड़ा गया और आिर्टकल 51A, यानी  तुÇहारी 
फ ंडामȂटल ǹूटीज़  क्या हȅ, यह बताया।  क्या वह गलत है? फ ंडामȂटल ǹूटीज़  क्या हȅ - अगर 
आप यह देख लȂगे, तो आपको मालूम हो जाएग ा।   मȅ यह नहीं बताना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक आप उस 
बात को छ ुपाना चाहते हȅ और मȅ आपको याद िदलाना चाहता हूं।  यह कतर्Ëय है - मोदी साहब ने 
जो नाम रखा है, कतर्Ëयपथ - लेिकन कतर्Ëय को ही भूल गए।   5 1A का जो आिर्टकल है, उसी को 
भूल गए हो!  सैक्युलर, सोशिलज्म, ये सब फालतू क े वडर् हȅ, इनको िनकाल दो!  यह कतर्Ëयपथ मȂ 
गड़बड़ी हो गई है।  इसिलए मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करूं गा िक कम से कम जब कभी वे आपके  पा स 
आएं - वे ज्यादा तो इधर नहीं आते हȅ, अगर आपको कहीं िमलȂगे - तो आप कह सकते हȅ िक जरा 
संिवधान क े तहत चलो, लोग राज्य सभा मȂ बोल रहे हȅ और उनके  उǄर देने मȂ मुझे बहुत िदक्कत 
होती है, इसि
लए आप यह कीिजए।   
सर, मȅ एक और एक बात बोलना चाहता हूं।  सुĢीम कोटर् ने सोशिलज्म और सैक्युलिरज्म 
को संिवधान क े बेिसक Îटर्क्चर का िहÎसा माना है और जजमȂट आÄटर जजमȂट मȂ इसे सही 
ठहराया गया है, लेिकन आप उसक
ो तो मानते!  हम बोल रहे हȅ, तो ठीक है, लेिकन चीफ 
जिÎटस बोल रहे हȅ, जजेज बोल रहे हȅ िक यह सही है।  दुिनया सही कह सकती है, लेिकन मोदी 
साहब इसको कभी मा
नȂगे नहीं, वह अपनी ही बात करȂगे।  वे जो बोलते हȅ, वही सही है।  आज आप 
भले ही राजनीित करने क े िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी को कोसने का मौका नहीं छोड़ते, खासकर िक जो इस 
देश क े िलए शहीद हुए हȅ, उनको नाम लेकर बात करते हȅ।   
 इमरजȂसी की बात तो बहुत बार हो गई।  इलेक्श
न से पहले भी इमरजȂसी की बात, 
इलेक्शन आने क े बाद भी वही, िफर उसके  बाद एक इलेक्शन मȂ भी वही, दूसरे इलेक्शन मȂ भी 
वही, तीसरे इलेक्शन मȂ भी वही, सदन मȂ भी वही, ये वही बात करते रहते हȅ।  उसका तो उन्हȗने 
उǄर िदया िक जो गलती हो गई, वह गलती हुई है, लेिकन हमको इसे सुधारना है, तो इन्हȗने 
िकतनी टी
का की।  उन्हȗने सहन िकया, आपने उनको सदन से बाहर िनकाला, लेिकन इंिदरा 
गांधी जी  1980 मȂ thumping majority से चुन कर आईं।  Thumping majority से, िसफर् दो साल 
मȂ!  कहां गई आपकी बातȂ!  इस टीका-िटÃपणी का उǄर लोग ही देते हȅ न!  यह चुना व करके  ही 
होता है।  चुनाव आया और जनता का िनणर्य हुआ।  इस अदालत मȂ तो आपने उनको िनकाल 
िदया, ठीक है, वे भी मान गईं, लेिकन उसके  दो साल बाद वे िफर से thumpi ng majority से आईं। 
...(Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने इसको गलत बताया और उनको सǄा से बाहर भी रहना पड़ा, लेिकन आज 
इंिदरा जी को सभी लोग याद करते हȅ और उनको सभी लोग मानते हȅ।  इनमȂ से बहुत से लोग 
वोिंटग क े िल ए गए हȗगे।  अब हमारे लोग भी उधर गए हȅ, बाहर क े भी गए हȅ।  सर, यह संगम है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... सामने वाले जो बैठे हȅ, वे ठीक हȅ, लेिकन वहां second, third, fourth row पर जो 
बैठे हȅ, वे सब या तो इध र से उधर गए या उधर से इधर आ गए।  हर पाटीर् से वहां गए, क्यȗिक ईडी 
मशीन, सीबीआई ...(Ëयवधान)... 
  
Ǜी सभापित: जयराम जी आपको क ु छ कह रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: इन्हȗने एक बड़ी वािंशग मशीन खरीदी है। कौन, हमारे शाह साहब!  इतनी 
बड़ी वािंशग मशीन है िक आदमी ही अंदर जा सकता है और clean होकर  बाहर आता है।  वह 
अंदर जाकर clean होकर बाहर आता है और वह वहां जाकर इतने जोर से िच Êलाता है।  िजन्हȗने 
यहां खाया, िपया, रहा, राज िकया, सब क ु छ बने, वे ही यहां पर हमको बुिǉ पढ़ाते हȅ और उÊटा 
बयान देते हȅ।  ऐसे लोग इस देश मȂ हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसे लोग ...(Ëय वधान )...  
 सर, संवैधािनक Ģावधान क े तहत कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने देश मȂ caste census की मांग की।  हम 
caste census की मांग इसिलए कर रहे हȅ, तािक कमजोर तबके  क े लोगȗ की बेहतरी क े िलए 
एक रणनीित बनाई जाए।  इसीिलए यह जो हमारी demand है, यह िकसी को खुश करने क े िलए 
नहीं है।  पॉिलिटक्स मȂ ऐसा होता है, आज मेरे साथ वोट देते हȅ, कल दूसरȗ को देते हȅ।  हमने 7 
साल मȂ देखा है, क ैसा हुआ, क्या हुआ, लोग बदलते क ै से रहते हȅ।  इसिलए आप वोटरȗ क े ऊपर 
गुÎसा मत िनकािलए, आप एिरया क े ऊपर गुÎसा मत िनक
ािलए।  कोई एिरया, कोई Îटेट अगर 
आपको वोट नहीं देता है, तो आप क्या करते हȅ िक आप उस उस Îटेट को पैसा देना बंद करते हȅ, 
जीएसटी वƪ पर नहीं देते हȅ।  यह आपका काम चल रहा है।  आप इिरगेशन Ģोजेक्ट क े िलए पैसा 
नहीं देते हȅ, रेलवे क े Ģोजेक्ट को पैसा नहीं देते हȅ।   
 सर, मȅ एक-दो िमनट और लूंगा और अपनी बात खत्म करूं गा।  डा. बाबा साहेब अंबेडकर 
ने आने वाली चुनौितयȗ से आगाह करते हुए संिवध
ान सभा मȂ कहा था ... 
  "In politics, we will have equality and, in social and economic life, we will have 
inequality.  How long shall we continue to  deny equality in our social and economic 
life?  If we continue to deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our political 
democracy in peril."  सर, गरीब और गरीब बन ता जा रहा है, अमीर और अमीर बनता जा रहा 
है।  इस देश क े  5  परसȂट लोगȗ क े पास 62 परसȂट संपिǄ है।  1 परस Ȃट लोगȗ क े पास आज  3  
परसȂट संपिǄ है।  सॉरी, 50 परसȂट लोगȗ क े पास – तो ये सारी चीजȂ हȅ।  आपकी इको नॉमी िकधर 
गई,  आप  लोग इस चीज को कम करने की िदशा मȂ काम क्यȗ नहीं कर रहे हȅ, यह मȅ आपसे 
पूछना चाहता हूँ?  आप  सभी चीजȂ कांिÎटǷूशन क े तहत करते हȅ, तो इसको क्यȗ नहीं िकया, 
यह मेरा सवाल है?   
सर, मेरा एक और दूसरा सवाल है।  मिणपुर मȂ लगातार िंहसा और अशांित जा
री है।  
...(Ëयवधान)... वहाँ िंहसा और अशांित जारी है, लेिकन डेढ़ साल मȂ मोदी जी को मिण प ुर की 
हालात का जायजा लेने का समय नहीं िमला।  वे पूरी दुिनया मȂ घूमते िफर रहे हȅ, देश मȂ घूमते 
िफर रहे हȅ, इलेक्शन क े िलए हर जगह जाते हȅ।   परसȗ मȅ जब उनसे िमला था, तो उस वƪ 
उन्हȗने मुझसे पूछा िक क ै से हो, तो मȅने बोला िक ठीक हूँ।  शायद वहाँ पर नƿा साहब भी थे।  
उन्हȗने बोला िक ठीक है।  िफर वे मुझे बोले िक आप बहुत घूम रहे हȅ।  तो मȅने बोला िक साहब, 
इलेक्शन मȂ घूमना ही पड़ता है।  आप जब गली-गली घूम रहे हȅ, तो मुझे कम से कम िदÊली मȂ तो 
घूमना पड़ेगा
।  यानी उनको सब जगह जाने का मौका िमलता है, लेिकन वे मिणपुर जाने क े िलए 
तैयार नहीं हȅ।  वहाँ राहुल गांधी खुद गए, वहां से पदयातर्ा िनक
ाली और ऑल पाटीर्ज़ क े लोगȗ ने 
उनको सपोटर् िकया।  जब वे वहाँ िनकल सकते हȅ, तब आपको तो इतन ा संरक्षण है, आप वहाँ क्यȗ 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
55

 
 
नहीं जा रहे हȅ, आप इस समÎया को क्यȗ नहीं सुलझा रहे हȅ?  मȅ यह पूछना चाह रहा था िक यह 
अशांित और िकतने िदन चलेगी, ऐसा क ैसा चलेगा?  यह आपको मुझे बताना चािहए। 
सर, हमने इस देश को एक रखा है।  वÊलभ भाई पटेल जी ने  500 से अिधक िरयासतȗ मȂ 
बँटे इस देश को एक िकया, लेिकन आप क्या कहते हȅ - एक हȅ, तो सेफ हȅ!  एक हȅ, तो सेफ हȅ, 
तो यह देश सेफ है, इसमȂ अगर को ई अंगार डालेगा, तो ऐसे लोग इसको फोड़ने का काम कर रहे 
हȅ।  
सर, मȅ आपका ज्यादा वƪ नहीं लेना चाहता।  मȅ लाÎट मȂ एक और क्वोट पढ़ देता हूँ।  
"Bhakti in religion may be a road to salvation of the soul but in politics, bhakti or hero 
worship is a sure road to degradat ion and to eventual dictatorship." यह dictatorship 
की बात है।  आप आज जो बजा रहे हȅ, ढोल बजा-बजा कर उनकी भिƪ की नाद कर रहे हȅ, तो ये 
लोग उनको िडक्टेटरिश
प की तरफ ले जाना चाहते हȅ और वे िडक्टेटर बनने को तैयार हȅ।  
इसीिलए, मȅ आपसे िवनती करू ँगा िक यह डेमोकर्े सी िडक्टेटरिशप क े तहत नहीं चलनी चािहए।  
हम सभी लोग जो आज संिवधान को मानते हȅ, हमȂ उसी पर चलना चािहए। 
सर, आज इस देश क े िलए एक बात कहनी जरूरी है।  जब देश को आजादी िमली, तो 
आपको मालूम है िक तब वहाँ क े Ģधानमंतर्ी एटली थे, जो लेबर पाटीर् क े थे।   
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
उस वƪ चिर्चल ने क्या कहा था? भारत को Îव
ाधीनता देने वाले लॉडर् एटली सरकार क े ĢÎताव 
पर चचार् क े दौरान िĤिटश संसद मȂ पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी और तत्क ालीन िवपक्षी नेता िवन्सटन चिर्चल ने 
कहा था िक आजाद होते ही भारत िबखर जाएगा और वह दुÍटȗ, बदमाशȗ और लुटेरȗ क े हाथ 
चला जाएगा।  चिर्चल का यह मानना था िक हम भारत को नहीं चला सकȂ गे, हम संिवधान नहीं 
बना सकȂ गे, इसीिलए उन्हȗने इस तर
ह की बात की, लेिकन पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू , सरदार 
वÊलवभाई पटेल, मौलाना आजाद, डा. अÇबेडकर ने इस देश मȂ डेमोकर्सी लाकर सबको बचा 
िलया। मȅ और क ु छ नहीं बोलना चाह ता हूँ।  अंत मȂ, मȅ डा. राहत इंदौरी क े अÊफाज़ क े साथ अपनी 
बात समाÃत करू ँगा - 
'जहाँ से गुज़रो, धुआँ िबछा दो, जहाँ भी पहुँचो, धमाल कर दो। 
तुÇहȂ िसयासत ने हक िदया है, हरी ज़मीनȗ को लाल कर दो। 
अपील भी तुम, दलील भी तुम, गवाह भी तुम, वकील भी तुम। 
िजसे भी चाहो हराम िलख लो, िजसे भी चाहो हलाल कर दो' 
 
 मȅ इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूँ।  आपने मुझे जो समय िदया, उसके  
िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ और आपसे यह िवनती करता हूँ िक मȅने जो समय िलया है, 
उसको मेरी पाटीर् क े समय से नहीं काटा जाए। 
 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मान्यवर, आपने एक न्यायालय की झंडा संबंिधत आदेश की चचार् की थी, उसकी 
Ģितिलिप सदन क े पटल पर रख दȂ। देिखए, क्या परफे क्ट टाइिंमग है - िनमर्ला जी ने 79 िमनट्स 
िलए और आपने भी 79 िमनट्स िलए।  It is a perfect timing!  Ǜी साके त गोखले।  
 
SHRI SAK
ET GOKHALE (West Bengal) : Sir, on Saturday, Prime Minister Modi 
presented 11 resolutions during his speech on the Constitution in the Lok Sabha. I call 
them 11 jumlas.  
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
But the problem is that Prime Minister Modi  needs to be reminded of the basics.  
Today and tomorrow, my Party, All Indi a Trinamool Congress, will remind Prime 
Minister Modi of the nine key terms in the Preamble of the Constitution of India, which 
his Government has complete ly destroyed. These are: We the People of India, 
Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic, Republic, Justice, Liberty and Equality. I 
will speak today on Justice for just thr ee minutes because injustice has been the 
hallmark of the Modi Government. I want to ask: How will Prime Minister Modi defend 
his record on justice to the following people?  
The 21 lakh MGNREGA workers of Bengal  have worked but haven't been paid 
for three years by Modi's Government.  He has withheld Bengal's dues. Why? 
Because, his Party lost the elections. Bilkis  Bano, whose rapists were forgiven and 
released by this Government.  Omar Kha lid, Khalid Saifi and numerous others have 
spent years in jail only because they dared to criticise Mr. Modi and Mr. Shah. Sir, 
750 farmers died outside the borders of Delhi, protesting for their rights against the 
laws which were later taken back by the Pr ime Minister. The people of Manipur, who 
today, as we speak, as I speak here, are seeing their homes being burnt and their 
families die every day.  I have had the person al privilege of experiencing justice under 
this Government. I was locked up in a jail in  Gujarat for 155 days in a case related to a 
tweet and Rs.500 money laundering case. Bu t then, I found out what real justice 
means when my leader, Ms. Mamata Banerj ee, sent me to this august House of 
Parliament, where my oppressors have to see my face every day.  Madam Mamata 
Banerjee understands justice and is commi tted to it. For social justice, as the 
Preamble says, Ms. Mamata Banerjee br ought schemes like Lakshmir Bhandar and 
Kanyashree. That Lakshmir Bhandar was brought a long time ago -- अब ये उसकी 
कॉपी कर रहे हȅ 'लाडकी बहना' -- when it was started by Ms. Mamata Banerjee.  
 Social justice can be brought through measures like Aparajita Bill to give justice 
to women who face violence, but that has no t yet been passed.  I do not know why 
the Finance Minister was so embarrassed ev en after our promptin g, when she said, 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
57

 
 
Women's Reservation Bill हमारी सरकार  1998 मȂ लाई I  What she did not  mention is 
that it was hon. Ms. Mamata Banerjee who had brought the Bill in 1998. 
 Sir, our Constitution gu arantees social, economic an d political justice to the 
people.  Where is social justice when minori ties are subjected to atrocities every day 
and when the Prime Minister ran a pois onous communal campaign during the Lok 
Sabha elections?  Where is economic just ice when our youth have no jobs and 
families have no money left, thanks to rising  prices and inflation?  The hon. Finance 
Minister can, at least, do the least and re duce taxes on the middle class.  Where is 
political justice when opposition leaders are threatened using CBI and ED and when 
the corrupt ones, who go through the BJ P washing machine, become squeaky 
clean?  
 The Prime Minister loves to talk abou t previous Governments and their record 
of 70 साल.  I have to admit that our Prime Minister has been very successful on one 
front.  हमारे यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी, the way he has destroyed the Constitution in 10 
years, previous Governments could not do f o r  7 0  y e a r s .   P M  M o d i  d o e s  n o t  c a r e  
about justice, but the people of India do, wh ich is why it was poetic justice when his 
party BJP was recently reduced to 240 seats in the Lok Sabha.  People destroyed his 
arrogance and his party.  And, from here, wi th my hand on the Constitution, I want to 
promise the Prime Minister that he will again be reminded of the meaning of justice 
which is in our Preamble, when his party BJP, which has deprived and defamed the 
people of Bengal, will be routed again in  2026 under the Chief Minister, Ms. Mamata 
Banerjee.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) :   Mr Deputy Chairman, Si r, I am indeed privileged 
to participate in this discussion on the glor ious journey of 75 year s of our Constitution 
o n  b e h a l f  o f  t h e  D M K  P a r t y .   O u r  C o n s t itution is a unique an d enduring document 
which has withstood many crises and the test  of time.  The Indian Constitution has 
not come out of a revolution, as has been in many other countries, but it has come 
out of a series of experien ces, developments rooted in constitutional methodologies 
and principles.  I have got a lot to say ab out it.  Before that, I would like to recall 
Thomas Jefferson, the architect of the Declaration of Independence and the third 
President of the United States  of America.  He once wrote that no Constitution in the 
world will survive for more than 19 years.  Later, the same theory  was re-affirmed by 
three researchers on an empirical study which has come out in ‘The Endurance of 
National Constitutions’ and it also said that every Constitution expires within 17 years.   
They stated some reasons for that, inclus ivity and adaptability of the Constitutio
 n 
being the main reasons.   
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
As far as we are concerned, we want to appreciate first the framers of the 
Constitution.  Regarding the statement of Th omas Jefferson, or as it has been re-
affirmed by three researchers, I would like to say that our Constitution has survived for 
more than 17 years and still it is robust an d dynamic.  What are the reasons for this?  
The other Constitutions have not been debated upon as much as us ours.  The 
American Constitution was debated and dr afted within four months and the South 
African Constitution was drafted within ni ne months, whereas we had the Constituent 
Assembly of India to draft the Constitution.  First, the Members were elected indirectly 
across the State from the Provincial St ates, from the Princely States and the 
Provincial Commissioners.  It came to about 389, and later, after the partition, it came 
down to 299, and, with that, the Constituent Assembly started functioning.  These are 
all very important facts.  We have to ment ion each of them to see the reason for the 
robust nature of our Constitution.  
 It held 11 Sessions which ran up to 165 days, out of which 114 days were 
focused totally on the Draft Constitution. Sir, 7,635 amendments were tabled and 
2,473 amendments were moved; whereas, in  the constitutions of other countries, 
amendments were not moved.  Subseque ntly, our Constitution has a glorious 
position.  Our Constitution is credited fo r establishing the rule of law and also 
fostering a responsible Government to our co untry.  Our Constitution played a pivotal 
role in shaping India's democratic characte r and safeguarding individuals’ liberties, 
balancing the delicate relationship between the sovereign State and federalism, and, 
above all, it formed the backbone of India's governance.  
Sir, before I come to the subject, I have something to say with regard to what 
the Finance Minister said in her opening speech.  It is about the first amendment 
made to the Constitution in 1951, which you are very well aware of.  She spoke about 
Article 19(4) of the Constitution.  I would like to speak about the same amendment.  
It is with regard to Article 15(4), 15(5) and 15(6). Sir, the first amendment to the 
Constitution was subsequent to a case of Champakam Dorairajan, which the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition also mentioned.  Everyone should know about the history.  
It happened first in Tamil Nadu, the then Madras Presid ency.  In 1921, when the 
Justice Party, our parent body, was ruling Tamil Nadu, a communal G.O. was issued, 
through which everyone was given the benefi t of reservation. Till then, only the upper 
caste was enjoying all the educational an d employment opportunities.  And, they 
came up with more reservation in 1927.  La ter, Champakam Dorairajan filed a case in 
the court alleging that the communal reserv ation deprived her of a genuine seat in 
medical college. The court upheld her pe tition and struck down the communal 
reservation order.  Further, more facts came up and the strange part was that 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
59

 
 
Champakam Dorairajan, who had filed the case, was not herself an applicant.   So, it 
was struck down.  During those days, the reservation benefits were enjoyed by the 
people of SC, OBC and other communities.  At that time, Thanthai Periyar, our 
mentor and our founder leader, Anna, launched a very big agitation in Tamil Nadu, 
demanding for reservation, which became a people's movement.  Because of that, 
the 1951 amendment was brough t. The first Amendment says  that, "Nothing in this 
article or in clause (2) of article 29 sha ll prevent the State from making any special 
provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes." So, Sir, everyone 
should realize that without this, the bene fit would not have been extended to the 
suppressed and oppressed classes all those years. It happened du e to the Dravidian 
movement.  What we call now Dravidian model is only this.  Only because of that, the 
reservation was restored. And later, when the Mandal Commission’s 
recommendations came for reservation to the OBC in education and employment, I 
would like to recall who all opposed, and who pulled down the Government of Mr. 
V.P. Singh, the then Prime Minister.  But th en it was implemented.  May I remind the 
learned Members in the Treasury Benches that it was done only by an O.M., that is, 
Office Memorandum.  If you are really inte rested in the welfare of OBCs, bring a 
constitutional amendment, as you did for th e EWS.  You did it for EWS, but you are 
still not bothered about the OBCs and you very proudly say everywhere that you are 
with the OBC community! 
 And this is the right time. Dr. Ambedk ar, who later became the Chairman of 
the Drafting Committee, was earlier on ly a Member in a Sub-Committee on 
Fundamental Rights.  Nine months before, he was assigned the responsibility of 
chairing the Drafting Committee.  On 27th of February, 1947, the Sub-Committee 
asked its Members to submit their ideas in writing. Dr. Ambedkar, along with Mr. 
Munshi, Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer and Harnam  S i n g h ,  a l s o  s u b m i t t e d  o n e .   I t  i s  
interesting to know that the title of the Draft Report, which Ambedkar submitted, was 
‘United States of India’.  His language wa s reminiscent of America's Declaration of 
Independence. He very clearl y said that the federalism must be upheld and more 
rights are to be given to the States.  But on the day of adoption, Munshi's Draft was 
adopted by the Committee.  Dr. Ambedkar was not there.  Later, he  tried his best to 
implement what all was in his mind in the Un ited States of India. Ultimately, Dr. Baba 
Saheb Ambedkar's intention was to strengthen  the States.  There is no explicit term 
‘federalism’ in our Constitution.  For the very  first time, it says in the Preamble, ‘India, 
that is, Bharat, shall be a Union of States. That itself is very emphatic.  Later, he 
became the Chairman of the Drafting Commi ttee.  It is very appreciable that the 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Constitution which was drafted and adopte d later established the foundation for a 
country that would respect diversity in relig ion and culture while upholding the values 
of equality and fairness.  This ought to be kept by the ruling party today. The nation's 
dedication to diversity and tolerance is demonstrated by the Indian Constitution which 
protects the rights of linguistic and religious  minorities.  Additionally, the Constitution 
preserved unity among many religious communities by guaranteeing that the State 
would not favour any one religion. The Cons titution guarantees that the State would 
not favour any one religion ov er another by supporting the secularism ideal.  It is very 
clear, Sir.  But, what is happening today?  I don't want to bring down the level of the 
debate because this discussion is on the Glorious Journey of 75 years of the 
Constitution.  So, we have to applaud. So many scholars, intellects were in the 
Constituent Assembly whom we fondly reme mber and it is our bounden duty to pay 
respect to all those people.  They are now called ‘the Framers of the Constitution’ -- 
Dr. Ambedkar, Mr. Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar  Vallabhbhai Patel, Maulana Abul Kalam 
Azad, Rajendra Prasad, K.M. Munshi, Alla di Krishnaswamy Iyer, B.N. Rao, Syama 
Prasad Mukherjee, J.B. Kripalani, Rafi Ahmed Kidwai, Mr. Santhanam, K.T. Shah, 
H.V. Kamath, T.T. Krishnamachari, and above all, Quaid-e-Millat saheb.  When the 
partition happened, when Jinnah wanted to have a separate nation for Muslims and, 
as I said, when 389 Members in the Cons tituent Assembly came down to 299, he 
declared saying, ‘whoever are the Muslims, come with me to the Muslim nation’. But, 
including Quaid-e-Millat saheb, the Muslims who are now in this country said, ‘we 
are Islamic people, but India is our country. ’ But how are they being treated now? I 
would again urge the Government that not an iota of apprehension should come in the 
minds of the linguistic and religious minority in this country.  But it often happens.  We 
have to see to that, Sir. Dr. Ambedkar, very , very responsibly told that.  He was, of 
course, lauded by everyone. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, while speaking about Dr. 
Ambedkar, said, ‘what a stream roller intelle ct he has brought into this Constituent 
Assembly, which is irresistible, indelible, and unconquerable’.  
 Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, very clearly 
said that the best thing that the Constituen t Assembly has done is that it has made 
Dr. Ambedkar the Chairman of the Drafting Committee.  Dr. Ambedkar was very 
responsive.  He appreciated each and ev eryone. The Leader of the Opposition 
quoted some.  Dr. Ambedkar very clearly says, "I came wi th no greater aspiration 
than to safeguard the rights and the interests of the Sche duled Castes people.  I had 
not the remotest idea that I would be entrus ted with such a big responsibility.  There 
are people bigger, better and more competit ive than me in this Assembly.  But they 
have made me its Chairman.  They have entrusted the responsibility to me. They have 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
61

 
 
chosen me as the Chairman of the Drafting Committee."   He says a lot about Shri 
Surendra Nath  Mukherjee.  West Bengal people should feel happy about it.  He said, 
"The task of the Drafting Committee woul d have been a very difficult one if this 
Constituent Assembly has been merely a motley crowd, a tessellated pavement 
without cement, a black stone here and white stone there with each member or each 
group was a law unto itself."  In that respect only, he is appreciating the Congress 
Party.  "It is because of the discipline of the Congress party that the Drafting 
Committee was able to pilot the Constitution in the Assembly with the sure knowledge 
as to the fate of each ar ticle and each amendment."  My job is not to be its 
spokesperson.  But I call a spade a spade.  We have got many things.  But we call a 
spade a spade.  Dr. Ambedkar shared the cr edit with each and every one.  He said 
that party discipline in all its rigidity wo uld have converted th is Assembly into a 
gathering of ‘yes men’.  Fortunately, ther e were rebels. They were: Mr. Kamath, Mr. 
Deshmukh, Mr. Sidhva, Prof. K. T. Shah and Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru.  He 
appreciated those who supported.  At the same time, he mentioned those who were 
rebels, who spoke against.  That is dissent . That is democracy.  That emerged in 
those days.  Our Constitution has very great qu alities. I do not want to go into that.  I 
have got something else.   
I want to remind the House of our great le ader.  He was a great  thinker.  He is 
incomparable.  He is the best scholar.  He is our Anna.  He was the founder leader of 
our DMK Party.  He used to write letters in the party official organ addressing the 
party cadre, enlightening them of what is goi ng on in the country, enriching them with 
the history of the world and the revolutions that happened here and there, for what 
reason, and how people have come out of sl avery.  He was educating the last person 
in the party.  He used to write to them.  But the way of addressing  them in the letter 
was ‘Dear brother.’   This fam ily bonding, this affinity was first brought in by him.  
Anna wrote a letter, which happened to be th e last one, which is also called ‘Will of 
Anna’.  At that time, he was the Chief Minist er.  He wrote that.  ‘Dear brother, I have 
never been mad after power.  Nor am I happy to be the Chief Minister of a State which 
comes under a Constitution which is federal in letter but in practice it is becoming 
more and more centralised.’  He expresse d that autonomy has to be given to the 
States. This was his last wish.  It is considered as his will.  He realised that the States, 
which are the constituents of this Union, were weakened slow ly, one by one, in 
stages.  What is happening now is much worse.  
 All the laws that have been enacted in  the recent days by BJP have either 
usurped the powers of the State or transgressed into the State's powers or it is 
minimizing or declining everything. I have to mention this. After the demise of Anna, 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
our great leader, the late Dr. Kalaignar took over as the Party Pr esident and the Chief 
Minister of the State. The first thing he said, when he addresse d the Press in Delhi 
after meeting the hon. Prime Minister conven tionally, that the first thing he was going 
to do was to constitute a committee to go into the Centre-State relations because 
without powers, being a Chief Minister of a Stat e, is of no use. Much worse is what is 
happening in Delhi now. In Delhi, totally, the Chief Minister's powers have been taken 
and given to the LG; the Chief Secretary will master over the Chief Minister, and 
Secretary will master over the Minister. That  is what is happening in Delhi, a Union 
Territory. But even in the States, the Stat es were not able to fulfil the needs and 
requirements of the people. So, Dr. Kalaignar constituted a committee under the then 
former Chief Justice of Madras High Court, Justice Rajamannar along with two other 
luminaries, Justice Chandra Reddy and Lakshmanaswami, who was an academician. 
The terms of reference entrusted to the co mmittee were very important. Kindly look 
into the Terms of Reference! It says, ‘w hat powers from the Union List and the 
Concurrent List should be transferred to the State List; and what powers should be 
deleted from the Union List’. When it was gi ven, a very important report came out. It 
gave a number of suggestions; out of which,  one is Inter-State Council, which also 
was brought into action during 1989 when Mr. V.P. Singh was the Prime Minister, 
thanks to our intervention.  It advocated for more rights to the States. Rajamannar 
Committee's vision is still a document. Whoeve r wants to see it can go into it. Later 
on, the Sarkaria Commission was appointed during Mrs. Indira Gandhi's regime. That 
also went into the Centre-State relations. Later on, the Punchhi Commission was also 
appointed for this. All these committees and commissions converged on one point 
that India's individuality lies in diversity. They identified this.  
Sir, Justice Rajamannar Committee called for greater autonomy to States 
including financial independence, and re-evaluation of Centrally-Sponsored 
Schemes. Learned Ministers are here; othe r Members, who are also learned, are 
here. A rural scheme suited to Tamil Nadu will not be su itable for Rajasthan or any 
other State in the North. So, Centrally-Spo nsored Schemes have to be re-evaluated. 
It needs a re-evaluation. The Sarkaria Commission furthered this vision by 
emphasizing consultation before Union legisl ation affecting States, and a larger share 
of tax revenues to be devolved to States. Despite these recommendations, 
implementation has been partial, having  much of the contradiction intact. The 
Punchhi Commission identified the need fo r reforms in the Concurrent List and 
proposed institutionalised mechanisms for reforms for resolving disputes between the 
Centre and the States. These reports offer a roadmap, bu t challenges still persist. 
Practically, the area of fiscal devolution an d legislation overlap. This is where the 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
63

 
 
commitment of federalism must be tested by  ensuring that States are empowered to 
contribute effectively to nation-building without being stifled by Central overrule.  
Sir, we are much affected. Dr. Ambedkar sa id that caste and creed discrimination is 
prevailing in India. But, out of our experience,  we feel that regional discrimination is 
much more predominant now. Step-motherl y attitude is shown to the States. For 
example, even under the Finance Commission, devolution of taxes to Tamil Nadu has 
been slowly declining.                                                                
 The Twelfth Finance Commission gave  3.069 per cent and the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission gave only 2.6 per cent.  For every one rupee, which we give to 
tax basket, we get only 29 per cent in return.  Actua lly, the Southern States, 
especially Tamil Nadu, which contributes more  to the GDP of this nation, are affected 
very much whereas those States which are of lower fiscal discipline are rewarded 
much.  That is what he said , regional discrimination.  I do not want to mention any 
particular State because our friends here ar e from various other States but we feel 
that the Northern States showing lower fis cal discipline are shown more favouritism.  
Tamil Nadu is performing very well in every area.  Take for example, higher education.  
The enrolment ratio overall in India is 28 per cent whereas ours  is 52 per cent.  So, in 
every area, every sphere, Tamil Nadu is doing very well but we are being victimized by 
the Union Government.  Also, the borrowing restrictions imposed under Article 293 
undermine the autonomy of the States, discourage fiscal discipline and stifle regional 
growth.  In this situation, we want to say that these things have to be revived.  It is 
high time.  Even very important is langua ge policy, a sensitive issue, which needs 
recaliberation.  Tamil Nadu’s consistent opposition to the imposition of Hindi is not 
about rejecting a language but about prese rving its linguistic diversity.  The two 
language formula adopted in Tamil Nadu has fostered inclusivity without 
compromising on national unity.  During the Constituent Assembly debates, though 
there was no sub-committee as like other th ings for language but it happened to 
show that many members proposed for Hind i to continue.  Before Independence, the 
official language of India was only Eng lish. But later, after Independence, they 
debated it in the Constitu ent Assembly and a section of members supported Hindi 
and a section of members supported English.   When it came to equal, Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad, who was the Chairman then, cast hi s vote and, by that, Hindi became the 
official language.  Article 368 also, I must appreciate, is the amending provision.  The 
amending provision is the only special feature, unique feature, in the Indian 
Constitution which many others do not have.  Because of that, so many amendments 
have been done and those amendments are be ing done to meet the need of the day.  
When the Constitution was drafted, it very cl early said about the official language that 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the Hindi shall be the official language in Devanagari script.  It further said that 
notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law provide for the use, 
after the said period of fifteen years, of (a) the English language, or (b) the 
Devanagari form of numerals.   So, it said that after fifteen years of the enactment of 
the Constitution, English would go off and then only Hindi would be the official 
language.  Again, our founder leader, A nna -- this House was benefitted by his 
presence as a Member from 1962 to 1967  – spoke very much about the language 
policy.   The Official Languages Amendment Act, 1963, came and it declared that the 
English shall also be the official language as long as non-Hindi speaking people 
accept it.  Whereas this Government is tota lly thrashing all those things which the 
Constitution has assured, it is not enough that you celebrate Constitution Day in the 
Central Hall, which you have deserted, and it  is not enough if you have a debate in 
b o t h  t h e  H o u s e s  o f  P a r l i a m e n t .   I t  m u s t  n o t  o n l y  b e  i n  l e t t e r  b u t  i t  m u s t  a l s o  b e  i n  
spirit.       
 When it has been assured, India is a co untry of complexity.  It is multilingual, 
multicultural, multi-regional and multi-relig ious whereas you want to bring everything 
into ‘one’, ‘One-Nation- One-Election’, ‘One-Nation-One-Ration-Card’ and all.  
Everything one, one, one, one! But, only  this Parliament divides the Lok Sabha and 
the Rajya Sabha. The Central Hall which us ed to unite the Members of both the 
Houses is now, totally, deprived of. A ne w Member who has come to the Lok Sabha 
will go off after five years without having acquaintance with the Rajya Sabha Members 
and the Lok Sabha Members! Why? When you are trying to unite each and 
everything, why are you dividing the Member s of Parliament of Lok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha?  That is what I say.  It is not just celebrating the Constitution. All the schemes 
which are implemented by this Government ar e either in Hindi or in Sanskrit. Learned 
Ministers, Puriji is here and my dear brother Yadav ji is here. Kindly tell.  Bhupender ji, 
you know better.  Any Bill or anything shou ld be in English, the Constitution says.  
But, who authorized you to name the nomenc lature of every sche me that you bring, 
or, every Bill you bring, either in Hindi or in Sanskrit? We enter into the Parliament. 
Now that we are accustomed, we are spelling out and pronouncing it, but we do not 
know the meaning of Makar Dwar. What is it? Wherever we go, we see only Sanskrit 
letters, we see only Hindi letters. See, Indi a is a Union of States; don't forget. Don't 
forget!  In the Eighth Schedule to the Co nstitution, there are 22 languages, and all 
those languages should be respected. And,  no one language should dominate the 
other. Tamil is the ancient language in this world. It is a holy language. When you say 
Sanskrit and Tamil are ancient or they ar e Classical Languages, Sanskrit is not a 
spoken language. It is only in books. It is in Vedas . Whereas, Tamil has a rich history 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
65

 
 
of literature, grammar and everything.  Ei ght countries have Tamil as the official 
language. Why are you denying this and showing this partiality? Why are you treating 
us like that? This step-motherly attitude is also what I say even outside, and not even 
an iota of apprehension, should creep into  the minds of the linguistic minorities and 
religious minorities. You are in power, but you have to treat the whole of India as one 
in your outlook, not in names. You are imposing, that is what we say. We are not 
against one language, not rejecting Hindi or any other language. Don't impose that. In 
Tamil Nadu, we have bilingual, only Tamil an d English. If anybody wants to learn any 
other language, let them. It is also interpreted that we have stopped people learning 
Hindi, and even the hon. Finance Minister has levelled an accusation that we stopped 
her from learning Hindi. No! The Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar 
Sabha’s headquarters is in Tamil Nadu. Every year, lakhs of people are studying there 
and getting graduated.  If we  are totally against a partic ular language, we would not 
have allowed it.  If you are interest ed, go ahead. But, the way in which the 
Government is acting today is totally anti-constitutional, anti-federal.   Sir, we want to 
insist upon one thing. If at all you are very sincere and if you are really devoted in 
celebrating the Constitution Day, you have  to uphold secularism and federalism, 
which is the most important factor, backbo ne of our Constitution and our country. 
(Time-bell rings.)  And, in this situation, Sir, I would like to conclude by saying only 
one thing. Federalism is not about weakening the Centre. It is about strengthening the 
Union by empowering the Constitution.   So, kindly keep in mind that we are not 
against the language, we are not against th e region, but you don't discriminate us 
and that is because we are lying at the bottom of India. It is not the last, rather India 
start from the South only. Our language is rich. Our contribution to this country is 
rich. Whenever the integrity and the sovereignty of India was affected, it was DMK 
which stood first to protect the nation. We had a slogan of "Separate Dravida Nadu ”. 
We gave it up only during the Chinese aggression. During the Bangladesh War, it was 
DMK which contributed more than any other State to save the nation. So, don't 
underestimate us. We have always been with  the country. So, stop this attitude of 
step-motherly treatment.  
 I would urge again, respect all lang uages, respect all religions, and tax 
devolution is very, very important. With thes e words, I thank you very much for giving 
this opportunity.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy.  
 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Thank you Deputy Chairman, Sir. 
…(Interruptions)… I am sitting quite opposite to you and centre-neutral. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मेरा ध्यान आप पर ही है, आप बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Sir, we are neither that side nor this side. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please address the Chair. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, under the towering leadership of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
and contributions made by the eminent Telugu Members like Bhogaraju Pattabhi 
Sitaramayya, Moturi Satyanarayana  , Durgabai Deshmukh and N.G. Ranga, the 
Constitution has become a beacon of hope for an ordinary citizen. It empowers the 
individuals to demand accountability, guaran tees equality before law and upholds the 
right of dissent. Sir, the constitutional and legal aspects will be spoken by my 
colleague, Shri Niranjan Reddy.  I would lik e to focus on the unconstitutional actions 
that are being undertaken by the NDA partner, Telugu Desam Party. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The subject is not Telugu De sam Party, but Constitution 
debate. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Unconstitutional actions that are being undertaken by 
one of the alliance partners of NDA. Sir, this is about the Constitution only. One of the 
youngest Members, junior Member of th e Telugu Desam Party in Lok Sabha has 
made an allegation against our former Ch ief Minister, Shri Jagan Mohan Reddy that 
he has diverted Rs.86,000 crores for personal  use. This is the allegation that their 
alliance partner has made -- I would like to  give a clarification -- that Scheduled 
Caste funds have been diverted for personal use.  Where is the number coming from? 
What is this number and what is the sanctity that this number has got? First of all, is it 
factually correct or not?  That is to be enquired into, Sir. How did she reach the figure 
of Rs.86,000 crores?  …(Interruptions)… Sir, TDP in Lok Sabha…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. …(Interruptions)…   
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
67

 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Sir, his turn will come and he can speak whenever his 
turn comes. …(Interruptions)… The TDP in Lok Sabha is talking 
about…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका समय जा रहा है, आप बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Sir, the Telugu Desam Party, which is the alliance 
partner of NDA, is talking about the violatio n of the Directive Principles of State Policy 
under Article 46. I would like to know from the Telugu Desam Party Members and also 
from NDA because they are NDA alliance: Do they know about Directive Principles of 
State Policy?  They are not justiciable, are not implemented and you cannot go to the 
court for violation. First of all, we  have not violated; Jagan Mohan Reddy ji has not 
violated any Directive Principles of Stat e Policy and this allegation is false and 
incorrect. This is what happens when you govern the State without reading the 
Constitution; that is applicable to TDP. …(Interruptions)… Article 46 of the 
Constitution of India states, the State must promote the educational and economic 
interests of the weaker sections of the people, especially, Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes.  
 Sir, the second point is protect these groups from social injustice, from all 
forms of exploitation.  This is what Article 46 says.  I really don't understand how the 
TDP Member in Lok Sabha could say that.   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय िव. िवजयसाई रेƿी जी, आप िकसी मेÇबर का नाम ले रहे हȅ।  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI RE
DDY:  I am not naming anybody, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But, those allegations you have to substantiate and give it 
here.  You have to give it by evening today.   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : I will give it.  I will give that speech.  I will authenticate 
and then give the speech to your good self, Sir. What I am trying to say is that it is 
totally false.  And, why am I highlighting th is is, they are the alliance partners of the 
NDA.  That is why I am highlighting this.  Si r, this allegation of diversion of Rs. 6,000 
crores is falsely made.  In fact, YSR Co ngress Party, during 2019 and 2024, brought 
Super 9, particularly, for SCs and STs in Andh ra Pradesh.  This is nothing but in tune 
with the Article 46.  One such scheme is Vidya Deevana - Vidya Deevana is a welfare 
scheme wherein 60,000 SC students have b een benefited.  Then, Vasathi Deevana is 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
a scheme where 1.83 lakhs SC students have been benefited.   Kalyanamasthu is a 
scheme where 17,153 SC brides have been  b e n e f i t e d .    S i r ,  t h e  1 7 . 4 4  l a k h s  S C  
households have been covered under free po wer.  Rs.3,000 to Rs.10,000 per month 
has been given and 12.14 lakh SC pensio ners have been benefited under Pension 
Kanuka.   There are 8.07 lakh SC beneficiaries under Amma Vodi.   Sir, Asara 
Scheme, Zero Interest, 16.83 lakh SCs have been benefited.  Under Cheyutha, 6.39 
lakhs SCs benefitted.   Unde r Jagananna Thodu, 1.01 la khs SCs benefitted.  These 
are all the benefits that have been conferred on SCs and STs, including BCs.  That 
has been done and then implemented successfully by YS Jagan Mohan Reddy Garu’s 
Government during 2019 to 2024. Why is th is allegation?  On what basis has this 
allegation been made?   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, speak on the subject.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Yes Sir, it is debate. And then, the second thing.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please, John Brittas ji, जब आपको बोलने का मौका िमलेगा, 
तब आप बोिलएगा।  Please no cross talks. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Sir, this NDA alliance partner, TDP, which is heading the 
State, has stopped all the schemes that have  been implemented during the last five 
years by YS Jagan Mohan Reddy ji, particularly for poor and downtrodden, SCs, STs 
and Minorities.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please speak on this Constitution debate. You know the 
rules.  I am requesting time and again.  Please. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Sir, there is violation of the Constitution.  When the 
arrest has been legally made and the cour t has sent him to judicial custody, the 
erstwhile Leader of  
*making hue and cry.  It is not the Government which has done 
it.  The Government has filed the case.  And, * says, ‘it is unconstitutional’.  How is it 
unconstitutional, Sir?  If it is unconstit utional, would court send him to judicial 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
69

 
 
custody?  No.  Sir, * is saying that he was put behind  bars illegally for 53 days.  It is 
not correct.  It has been legally... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I am requesting you again under the rules.  Otherwise, 
this will not go on record.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Yes sir.  I will tell you, Sir. 
* 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I am again requesting, it will not go on the record.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Yes sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  It will not go on the record. Please speak on the subject.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  What is unconstitutional, I will tell you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  P l e a s e  s p e a k  o n  t h e  s u b j e c t .  A n d ,  t h i s  d e b a t e  i s  o n  
Constitution, not on TDP and State’s functioning.  Please.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Incidentally, it is TDP, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the subject. I am requesting you again.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Sir, what is constitutional violation?   I will tell you, Sir. 
Not implementing the manifesto is unconstitutional. 
   When you are saying something in th e manifesto and people have elected 
you, not implementing the manifesto is definitely unconstitutional. Weakening of right 
to bharosa, which is one of the promises that has been made in there, is also 
unconstitutional....(Interruptions)...They have banned the English medium. What is 
the necessity for banning the English medium? The English medium is the medium 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   I am requesting you time and again. Please, Vijayasai 
Reddyji, speak on the subject. 
                                         
 
* Not recorded. 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  What unconstitutional is:  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Again I am requesting you, Vijayasai Reddyji, please 
speak on the subject.   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  
* 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अगर आप इस िवषय पर नहीं बोलते हȅ तो आप जानते हȅ िक it will not go on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...It will not go on record. ...(Interruptions)...You are 
losing your time.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  It doesn't matter, Sir. I would like to expose it.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  No, but it is not on the subject. Please speak on the 
subject only.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  
* That is unconstitutional. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप जानते हȅ िक रूÊस और रेगुलेशंस क े तहत there are clear rulings of the 
Chair. अगर आप िकसी Ëयिƪ पर आरोप लगा रहे हȅ, तो उसको आप िबना substantiate िकए 
और माननीय चेयरमैन की परिमशन क े बगैर नहीं लगा सकते।  It will not go on record, I am 
telling you. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Sir, further, what is unconstitutional is, dividing the 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I will call the next person no w. I have asked you several
 
times to speak on the subject.  I am again requesting you to speak on the subject, 
otherwise I will call the next person.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  What is it, Sir?  
 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
71

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ िकसी और का नाम बुलाऊँ गा।  मȅने आपसे कई बार िरक्वेÎट की है, आप चेयर 
की ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
 SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :   Sir, I have only a few points – two-three points. 
...(Interruptions)... 
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : But, please speak on  the Constitution. 
...(Interruptions)...I know and you also know what you are speaking. The House 
also knows it. Please speak on  the subject; otherwise, I will call the name of next 
speaker now.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, shall I ask you one thing? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  No; no, please speak on the subject. That is my only 
request.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :   That is the subject only, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... Is 
dividing the society on caste and religion basis unconstitutional or not? 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Sir, it is definitely unconstitutional. That is what they are 
doing. My next point is this. 
*...(Interruptions)... 
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Sir, how is it possible? Is it not unconstitutional? 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िवजयसाई रेƿी जी, सीएम क े बारे मȂ िडÎकस करने क े बारे मȂ िक्लयर रूिंलग  है।  
जब तक आप इसको substantiate नहीं करते हȅ और ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन की परिमशन नहीं लेते 
हȅ, you cannot speak.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Sir, ...(Interrupt ions)... 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   No; no, you cannot speak. ...(Interruptions)...There are 
rulings on it. ...(Interruptions)... No, you cannot speak on those subjects.  Please, I 
will call the name of another person. 
  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Please, Sir, if you don't allow me ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   I can't do anything. ...(Interruptions)...You have to 
follow the rules. You please speak on the subject.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Sir, what is unconstitutional is  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please, please speak on the subject. 
...(Interruptions)...Speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions)...Vijayasai Reddyji, you 
please speak on the subject.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:   Sir, if it is not on the subj ect, if your goodself feels that 
it is not on the subject ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No; no, there are rulings; there are rules and procedure. 
  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Thank you very much, Sir.  I am sorry, if you feel that it is 
not the subject ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, it’s not about my feeling.  आप जो कर रहे हȅ, उसके  
बारे मȂ हाउस क े रूÊस हȅ।  You are not following them. मȅने आपसे अनेक बार िरक्वेÎट की 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Discriminating one particular district, as against other 
districts, is also unconstitutional
. Not being able to control the increasing crime 
against women is also unconstitutional. ...(Interruptions)...That is what is happening 
in the State. I am not referri ng to anybody particularly. ...(Interruptions)...Sir, when 
the floods had come in Vijayawada, the st atement given by the State Government 
was that the floods had come all of a sudden and that they had only 24 hours advance 
notice. However, they thought that evicting so many people in one go in just 24 hours 
or 48 hours’ time was impossible.  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
73

 
 
 Therefore, we have allowed them to stay.  And, so many people have died.  It 
is a natural calamity.   Is it constitutional?  That is not what is constitutional, Sir.    
And, every effort should be made by the Government.   Whether we have 24 hours or 
48 hours, to the extent possible, you have  Government machinery on your hand; if 
not all the citizens, every effort  should be made to evacuate them.   That is what the 
Constitution speaks about. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please conclude, Vijayasai Reddy ji. Your time is already 
over.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you. Now, Shri Debashish Samantaray.  
…(Interruptions)..  आपकी टनर् आएगी, तब आप बोिलएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please, no, no. 
…(Interruptions).. ..  माननीय देबाशीष सामंतराय जी, िसफर् आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी।  
Nothing else is going on record.  
 
SHRI DEBASHISH SAMANTARAY (Odisha) : Sir, I thank the Chair for giving me this 
opportunity to speak on the Constitution of India.   At the outs et, we all know here 
that it was based on the diversity and the multiplicity of this country-- from North to 
South, from East to West, many languages, many habits, many food habits and many 
f o r m s  o f  a r t .    T h i s  j o u r n e y  s t a r t s  w i t h  Pandit Nehru; today, we have hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi; and, in  between, there have been other Prime 
M i n i s t e r s .     M a n y  G o v e r n m e n t s  h a v e  c o m e  a n d  g o n e .    B e f o r e  t h i s  d e b a t e  o n  
Constitution, I have been hearing the Lok Sabha speech es.  The Rajya Sabha is 
having it today.   It is basically a bo xing round between the Congress and the BJP, 
and, here, all the other regional parties have been forgotten.  There have been black 
spots in this journey of our Samvidhan.  Okay!  You spoke about the black spots 
during the Emergency, that it was unconstitutio nal.  That many agree.   In return, the 
Leader of the Opposition was justifying all this.   In this, the federal structure was 
forgotten; its multiplicity was forgotten; an d diversity of this country was forgotten.  
Today, we are discussing, in this journey, wh
 ere we have reached; how we are going 
to take forward this journey; in 75 year s, how this country has progressed towards 
making us stronger and to making the poor  safer.  If you see,  nowadays, we speak 
about Emergency.  But, today, there is a ps eudo Emergency in India.   The so-called 
constitutional watch-dogs have become ...(Interruptions)...Anybody can be behind 
the bar without any justification. 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सर, ये क्या बोल रहे हȅ? 
 
Ǜी देबाशीष सामंतराय: जो बोल रहे हȅ, उसे सुन लीिजए।  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: आप गलत बोल रहे हȅ। यह पािर्लयामȂट है, यह कोई ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी देबाशीष सामंतराय: यह कोई आपका Ģदेश नहीं है ...(Ëयवधान).
 ..  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आपका बोलने का समय समाÃत हो रहा है।  
 
Ǜी देबाशीष सामंतराय : सर,  सच बात बोलने से इनको ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप िवषय पर बोलȂ। आपका बोलने का समय खत्म हो रहा है।  
 
Ǜी देबाशीष साम
ंतराय : सर,  मȅ बोल रहा हूं िक आज कॉन्ÎटीǷूशन की हालत क्या है? 
...(Ëयवधान)... क्या कोई जिÎटिफके शन था, कई-कई चीफ िमिनÎटसर् को लेकर जेल मȂ डाल 
िदया, िफर उन्हȂ बेल नहीं दे रहे हȅ, इसके  पीछे रीज़न क्या है? सर, ज़रूर  यह एक िकÎम की 
इमरजȂसी  देश मȂ चल रह
ी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ और ज़ोर से ठोक कर बोलूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप बोलȂ।  
 
Ǜी देबाशीष सामंतराय: सर,  मȅ बोल रहा हूं।  Sorry, maybe, I have hurt your sentiments.  
But it is fine.  In this whole journey, the federal structure was not mentioned.  Thanks 
to Shri Tiruchi Siva, he did speak about Tamil Nadu.  Here, we have Odisha.   Till 
recently, it had been ruled by regional pa rties for five terms – Naveen babu’s BJD 
ruled the State.  Now, we have a different Government.  We accept it in this 
democratic structure.   
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
But you know, there is neglect of States .
 We are supposed to have an inclusive 
Centre-State relationship to have this Co nstitution healthy. It is not only about 
favoured States where th ere is a double-engine sarkar that they get favoured. And 
even Odisha is frequently visited by disast ers. To mitigate these disasters, we have 
been always seeking the Centre's help. Bu t you know, each and every time, we have 
been refused as if we are not a part of this federal structure, as if we are not part of 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
75

 
 
India. But we have implemented our own schemes on our own. They talk about 
empowering women. Naveen Babu has em powered one crore women under Mission 
Shakti. He has taken a vow that ‘I w ill empower the women of Odisha because 
empowered women ... ...(Interruptions)...मत घबराइए, हारȂगे आप भी। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ।  …( Ëयवधान)… Please speak. 
...(Interruptions)...सीट पर बैठकर कमȂट न करȂ, Ãलीज़।  देबाशीष जी, आप बोलȂ। 
 
SHRI DEBASHISH SAMANTARAY : When we spoke about empowerment of women, 
we proved it also. Not only are we empo wering them through Mission Shakti, but 
even in the three-tier Panchayat sy stem, Naveen Babu brought 50 per cent 
reservation for women. There is no ment ion of the empowerment of women. The 
Parliament has approved 33 per cent reservation for women.  But I don't know if it will 
see the light of the day. I don't know. So th ese are my observations on this journey of 
our Samvidhan which somewhere has gone out of the track, and none of us are 
willing to address it. (Time-bell rings) Ultimately, cutting across party lines, without 
going into who has achieved what, who has done what, who has corrected the 
Constitution, I think, it is our responsibility,  responsibili ty of the Members of both the 
Houses to keep this Constitution healthy and vibrant, and, for India in its diversity and 
multiplicity. Thank you, Sir.    
                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you Debashishji. Now, Shri A.D. Singh.  
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar) : Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, for giving me this 
opportunity to speak on this Constituent Assembly debate.  
 I would like to quote what Dr. B.R. Am bedkar said in the concluding address 
of the Constituent Assembly, We are entering into a life of contradiction. In politics, 
we will have equality, and in social and economic life, we will have inequality. How 
long shall we continue to live this life of contradictions? This is becoming very true, 
more so, in the last 10 years. The Preamble to the Constitution is the most eloquent 
chapter of the vision of India. It describes the democratic and progressive values of 
the Indian Republic, the concept of justic e, liberty, equality, and fraternity, which 
frames the vision of India. Challenging it  today, there are many dangerous trends -- 
the denigration of our democratic institutio ns, the misuse of investigating agencies, 
the control on news media, the pressure s on the judiciary, and even the legal 
fraternity and the blatant communalisation of our politics and public lives. All of these 
represent our Constitutional makers' worst fears.  
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
I would also want to bring to the notice of the House the statement of our hon. 
Finance Minister regarding the First Amendment. The First Amendment was 
necessitated on account of the views ex pressed in the Constituent Assembly 
regarding land reforms, SC/ST reservations . What has been presented by the hon. 
Finance Minister was misrepresentation of facts, which was adequately clarified by 
Khargeji.  
 Now, I come to the Directive Principl es of State Policy.  The egalitarian 
liberalism aims to reduce inequality and not create an absolute equal society. Article 
38(2) of the Directive Principles insists that States shall strive to minimize the 
inequalities of income and eliminate the inequalities of status, facilities and 
opportunities. 
 Further, Article 39(C) emphasises that  the economic system ought not to 
result in concentration of wealth and means of production to common detriment.  
Further, I want to bring to the notice of the House how the Act of 1991 regarding 
places of worship has been violated.  Ther e were some sensible comments by Shri 
Mohan Bhagwat advising the fraternity that there was no need to go digging each and 
every mosque to find a temple there.  It seems that everybody has forgotten his 
advice and there are new disputes pertaini ng to mosques and dargahs in Sambhal, 
Ajmer, Bhadaun, Dhar.  The Places of Wors hip (Special Provisions) Act of 1991 has 
put a full stop on questioning any pl ace of worship as it existed on 15
th August, 1947.  
Of course, the Ram Janmabhoomi  got made out as an exception in view of the 
ongoing dispute.  However, of late, it ha s been seen that many lower courts are 
passing orders for the survey of mosques by passing the Places of Worship Act.  The 
recent Sambhal Shahi Masjid controversy is a cleverly engineered conspiracy to keep 
the Hindu-Muslim pots simmering.  The way the petition was filed and the speed with 
which the survey was ordered, all raise questions about the sanctity of due process.   
महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहता हूं : 
'मंिदर भी ले लो, मिÎज़द भी ले लो, 
इंसान क े खून से मगर अब न खेलो।' 
Talking about Viksit Bharat , which the Treasury Be nches have always 
repeated, I want to know what Viksit Bharat relates to, India or Bharat!  We have two 
bharats, two sections of people.  Six to seve n per cent are people in the organized 
sector who benefit from everything and about 93-94 per cent of people who are in the 
unorganised sector, mainly farmers and unorg anized labourers.  Their position is 
going from bad to worse.  If you look at th e number of billionaires that is increasing in 
India, I think it has reached from nine to about 120 today.   So, what are we doing for 
the upliftment of the 94 per cent people?  Zero!  I don’t think any effort is being 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
77

 
 
made.  Just doling out five kilograms of anaj is not enough.  They want employment.  
They don’t want free anaj.  I can tell you, in my Stat e of Bihar, because of that anaj, 
we are not finding workers having any desi re to work.  I don’t know how we would 
become Viksit Bharat.  Maybe the Viksit Bharat relates to six to eight per cent of India 
while the rest is growing poorer and poor er.  The gap between the wealthy and the 
poor is increasing day by day.  ( Time-bell rings)  Another thing that I wish to bring to 
your notice is that the way the Government is  behaving is only dividing the society.  I 
do not know what will happen in the future.  The minorities are feeling too left out.  
They are in absolute fear and they don’t have the support of any authority to whom 
they could go. ( Time-bell rings) One last point, Sir.  I want to bring to the notice of 
the House that the lower Judiciary has to be advised to take up the cases fast so that 
the lower Judiciary can give judgements, be it  civil or criminal cases. I find that what 
the lower level judiciary can do in one year , the cases that they could solve in one 
year, it takes them 10-20 years to bring them to an end.  Let me give an example. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude now.  
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH :  Sir, let me make one last point.  Let me give an example.  My 
family has filed a partition suit in 1991.  No thing has happened till now.  Not that I am 
affected, but this is the way the lower judiciary is functioning.   
                                                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, Shri A.D. Singh.  Shri G.K. Vasan. 
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu) :   Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, thank you for giving 
me the opportunity to participat e in the Discussion on the 75
th year of the glorious 
journey to the Constitution.  We should no t forget that it has taken more than two 
years of hard work and dedication for our leaders, scholars, philosophers and people 
from different walks of life to give us this precious Constitution. 
 Sir, our Constitution has given the power to people to elect their own 
representatives and be governed by popula r Governments. As a result, today, we 
have a stable Government in the country el ected for the third term under which the 
Constitution is safe and secure.  Winston Churchill once said, "No Constitution will 
hold India together because of its divisi ons, differences, based on religion, caste, 
community and language." His thoughts an d thinking has been completely proved 
wrong, and we are proud as countrymen. We stand united even after 75 years of 
adoption of Indian Constitution.  India is growing stronger day-by-day. We are 
becoming a guiding star and source to other nations, even to leading nations of the 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
world.  This is possible only because of our leaders.  The Constituent Assembly was 
constituted of leaders from all parties fr om various States. All the leaders had a 
national look. That is the reason the Dr afting Committee had given an excellent and 
extraordinary document to the country.  Ou r leaders examined two important aspects 
before drafting the Constitution, stability and accountability. I would like to say that 
we should thank the Chairm an of the Drafting Committee, Dr. Ambedkar, and his 
colleagues, for their excellent and great co ntributions.  We should also thank the 
Members of the Drafting Committee for their dedicated work.  
Finally, I would like to say that the Committee' s objectives were food to the starving 
poor, clothes to the needy poor, to provid e shelter to the homeless and to provide 
equal opportunity to all the people in the country. I am sure, keeping this in mind, the 
Government is functioning and it is our duty  to uphold the spirit of the Constitution, 
which is the most sacred book of the nation and that is the ultimate homage we can 
pay to the framers of this wonderful Constitution. 
 
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI): Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I was born two years and two months after our 
Constitution was adopted.  
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
As India grew under the canopy  of a protective Constitution, so did my generation.  
The first to be born in Independent India, for us the Constitution is sacred. I cannot 
think of any occasion in my professional lif e going back more than 50 years, which 
could even remotely rival the solemnity and the honour of being asked to speak in this 
august House to discuss the glorious 75 y ears of the Constitution. For this, I shall 
remain eternally grateful to the hon. Prime Minister and the leadership of my Party.  
This discussion must start with paying a tribute to the visionaries of the Constituent 
Assembly. They produced a Constitution that  drew upon our history, our culture, our 
civilisational experience of 7,000 years, en suring that it was not overpowered by a 
mindset born of 190 years of Colonial rule. The framers of the Cons titution therefore, 
deserve our eternal gratitude.  Democracy wa s not imported into India in 1947. India 
has had democratic traditions from way ba ck to the 6th Century BC in places like 
Vaishali, which was the capital of the Republic of Vajji. One of the oldest 
democracies, the mother of democracies, our democracy, predates the Westphalian 
order by a very long period. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
79

 
 
 In the run-up to and after Independ ence, there was no shortage of the 
prophets of doom, those who prophesied th at India was bound to fail.  The hon. 
Leader of the Opposition today recalled statements attributed to the then Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill.  I have sim ilarly come across a statement by Claude 
Auchinleck, the former Commander-in-Chief of  the British Indian Army.  He wrote in 
1948, and I quote, "A Punjabi is as differ ent from a Madrasi as a Scot is from an 
Italian. The British tried to consolidate it , but achieved nothing permanent.  No one 
can make a nation out of a continent of many nations." When I was going through 
this statement, I was reminded that th is gentleman and Prime Minister Winston 
Churchill, perhaps, were the lineal progenitors of the spiritual guru of the young leader 
of the Congress Party who prophesied that Sam Pitroda...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, how can he say this? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI:  I am referring to the spiritual...(Interruptions)... I have 
not taken anybody's name.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   I will look into it. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :  I have referred to the spiritual leader, the 
enlightenment provider of a young Congress leader who said this when he compared 
our diverse communities to foreign races.  ...(Interruptions)...Such prophecies were 
forthcoming even before we witnessed the horrors of partition.  Going through the 
Constituent Assembly debates, it becomes abundantly clear  that the framers realised 
what was at stake.  This is what Sardar Patel had to say about the endeavours of the 
Constituent Assembly. He said, and I quote, "There is no alternative to this Assembly 
except chaos and anarchy."  Despite a ll odds, India has succeeded, India has 
thrived, except for a shameful period of 21  months between 1975 and 1977.  No other 
developing country, with the exception of Costa Rica, has seen a longer run of 
unbroken democratic rule since World War-II.   As a student of history and evolving 
political systems, one could say with a de gree of confidence that the experiment of 
the United States was the defining moment of the 18
th century for democracy and 
India will be remembered as the exemplar of the 20 th and 21 st century as the largest, 
most vibrant, youngest and most diverse democracy.  We are diverse in terms of 
languages, cultures, customs and tradition,  but united by this Constitution which 
helps us overcome the various centripetal and centrifugal forces that threaten to break 
the nation apart.   
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Hon. Chairman, Sir, when the nation wa s being targeted and was facing many 
challenges, during the integration of Prin cely States, some provisions were made 
which were meant to be temporary, transitional and special provisions, thus 
underscoring their impermanence.  Under su ch a provision was kept Article 370 in 
Part-XXI of the Constitution, and I quote, "It can be garnered from the historical 
context for the inclusion of Article 370 and the placement of Article 370 in Part-XXI of 
the Constitution that it is a temporary prov ision."  In a speech lasting over one hour 
and 18 minutes, the hon. Leader of the Opposition provided advice, much of it 
gratuitous, and told us that we must go back to the debates in the Constituent 
Assembly, we must remind ourselves of  what Babasaheb Ambedkar and other 
Members of the Constituent Assembly wrote an d said.  I would refer, in this context, 
to some advice that was given at that po int of time by such stalwarts as Dr. 
Ambedkar and Sardar Patel.  Despite vehement opposition, this special provision was 
included primarily because of Sheikh Abdu llah's demand for autonomy, supported by 
his dear friend, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.  In a letter to Sheikh Abdullah, Ambedkar ji 
had warned him of the long-term consequen ces and he wrote and I quote, "You are 
offering wrong advice to Pandit Nehru."  Sir, this is Ambedkar ji’s writing, "You are 
offering wrong advice to Pandit Nehru.  By giving special status to Kashmir, you are 
isolating Kashmir from the mainstream of Indi a.As a result, there will be no industrial 
growth or employment opportunities in Jammu  and Kashmir.   I will not be a party to 
your efforts. " 
 
[THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) in the Chair] 
 
This was the only provision in the Constitution whose drafting Babasaheb Ambedkar 
did not oversee. When the Constituent Assembly passed Article 370, then numbered 
306A, Ambedkar stayed silent.  Sir, even Sardar Patel was shoc ked at the leeway 
given to Sheikh Abdullah and his colleague s. In a letter to Gopalaswami Ayyangar, 
discussing Sheikh Abdullah's objections to the applicability of fundamental rights and 
directive principles of State policy in Kashmi r, Patel wrote, and, I quote, "You realise 
the anomaly of the State b ecoming part of India, and, at the same time, not 
recognising any of these provisions. Whenever  Sheikh Saheb wishes to back out, he 
confronts us with this duty to the people."   Patel then goes on to add sarcastically, 
"Of course, he owes no duty to India or to the Indian Government. In these 
circumstances, any question of my approval  does not arise." Madam, I have quoted 
both Babasaheb Ambedkar and Sardar Pa tel only because th e Leader of the 
Opposition in his speech lasting one hour and eighteen minutes gave us gratuitous 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
81

 
 
advice that we should go back to the writ ing of these stalwarts in the Constituent 
Assembly. 
I submit, Madam,that the Congress a bdicated its responsibility to the 
Constitution with regards to Kashmir, and, I say this with all emphasis. They betrayed 
the framers who inserted this article with  the clear expectation, and let me quote 
Ayyangar here: "Jammu and Kashmir will become ripe for the same sort of integration 
as has taken place in the case of other Stat es."  Madam, what should have been a 
transitional provision ended up assuming a permanent character for nearly 70 years 
because the Congress lacked the courage to act. Article 370 was an anomaly, an 
aberration, a fracture in the constitutional body  politic of India. It militated against the 
very idea of India.  A land that holds special  significance in Bharat's history, going all 
the way back to Rishi Kashyap, became almost alien to India after its independence. 
Its residents, some of whom trace ancestry back to the Vedic ages, did not enjoy the 
same fundamental rights that the rest of  their countrymen enjoyed.  They had no 
rights, no education and no jobs.  Mada m, the SC/ST communities there did not 
enjoy benefits of reservation and those pr ovisions and laws did not apply to them 
automatically. The hon. Prime Minister, whilst addressing the Lok Sabha, explained 
about how Article 35A of the Indian Consti tution -- which was part of the legal 
architecture of Article 370 -- empowered th e Jammu and Kashmir State’s legislature 
to define permanent residents of the State and provide special rights and privileges to 
them, which were not available to Indian citi zens in general.  Madam, it needs to be 
stressed that Article 35A was not included in the Constitution under Article 368.  It 
was implemented quickly and quietly by a pr esidential proclamation in 1954 without 
being tabled in Parliament. Under the se parate Constitution, permanent residents 
could purchase land and immovable prop erty, vote and contest elections, seek 
Government employment, and avail themselves of other State benefits such as higher 
education and healthcare. Non-permanent re sidents of the State, even if Indian 
citizens, were not entitled to these privileges.   The provisions facilitated by Article 35A 
and the State's permanent resident laws we re criticised over the years for their 
discriminatory nature, including the hard ships imposed on immigrant workers, 
refugees from West Pakistan, and the Stat e's own female residents who could lose 
their permanent resident status by marrying out of the State. The industry of brokers, 
who claimed to be representa tives of J&K, enabled a culture of stone pelting and 
corruption. Government schemes remained unimplemented.  We used to call Kashmir 
‘Paradise on Earth’, but how many could even  visit against the backdrop of constant 
terrorist activity?  
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 As a Foreign Services Officer who was a part of diplomatic missions to many 
countries, -- I was also stationed in Ge neva and New York -- I would often see 
India's image get tarnished.  Because of the Kashmir issue, countries with terrible 
human rights records deigned to lecture us.  On 5th, August, 2019, the President of 
India, Shri Ram Nath Kovind, issued a new presidential order whereby all the 
provisions of the Indian Constitution were  made to apply to the State without any 
special provision. This implied that th e State's separate Constitution stood 
inoperative, including the privileges grante d by Article 35A.  Madam, it took the 
indomitable courage and resolve of the hon.  Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, to 
abrogate this Article of the Constitution, which though intended to be temporary, was 
made de facto permanent by appeasement politics.  Only Prime Minister Modi could 
have dared to do so.  Before he took the final decision of 5th August, 2019, many of 
the so-called representatives of the State ha d dared him saying that if anyone even 
touches Article 370, आग लग जाएगी। Leaders had tweeted, and I quote, "Long after 
the Modi Government is a distant memory, ei ther J&K won't exist as a part of India 
or Article 370 will still exist." This was re garded as inconceiva ble by them. Yet the 
hon. Prime Minister demonstrated how th is longstanding aberration was finally 
removed.  What the Prime Minister did wa s truly beyond imagination. The BJP had 
declared the abrogation of Article 370 in th eir manifesto.  Lots of preparations and 
consultations had been done before the actua l historic decision, including field visits 
by many people who provided feedback.  That entire story will also emerge before too 
long.  It was a very big bet, but we delivered  as it has always been  a part of our core 
philosophy as a party. Shri Syama Prasad Mukherjee had said, "You cannot have two 
sets of Constitution for one nation.  एक राÍटर्, एक िनशान, एक िवधान।“ With abrogation 
of Article 370, Bharat has become whole again.  एकीकरण ही नहीं, भारतवषर् की सÇपूणर्ता 
भी हुई। A historic wrong was corrected and the country was finally united in body, 
letter and spirit. The decision was also uphe ld by the hon. Supreme Court and is now 
irrevocable.  Madam, this historic action is already bearing fruits.  Every citizen of the 
two Union Territories now enjoys his and he r fundamental rights and receives  myriad 
welfare benefits, including upward social mobility from reservation. The same Lal 
Chowk in Srinagar, which was once the hub of stone peltin g is now a vibrant public 
space.  Tourism in the region has reached an all-time high with more than 15 per cent 
annual growth rate observed in the tourism s ector in the last three years.  Free and 
fair elections have taken place with an elected Government now in place. The old 
stone pelting imagery of Lal Chowk also remi nds us of dreadful refrain in the late 80s 
and early 90s, ‘ रािलब,गािलब या चािलब’, which meant ‘convert, die or leave’.  
Subjected to genocide-like conditions, Kashmiri pundits w e r e  f o r c e d  t o  f l e e .  T h o s e 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
83

 
 
who stayed were dragged out of their homes and ruthlessly murdered. There has 
been a lot of talk about the Constitution being a suraksha kawach .  Were these 
Kashmiri pundits not a minority?  Where was this constitutional shield then?  Where 
was the nyaya when Kashmiri pundits were hounded  out of their homeland of nearly 
5,000 years? Madam, today, the Congress party portrays itself as the saviour of 
minorities.  But do they expect us to forget  that they ran camps for forced sterilization 
of Muslim men in Old Delhi during 1976?  In  furthering their policy of divide and rule, 
like our colonial masters, the Congress en gineered communal riots where so many 
Muslim brothers and sisters lost their lives. Did these poor people have no 
constitutional rights? My advice to the so-c alled defenders of the Constitution would 
be to realize that a sincere apology ma y serve you better than carrying unopened 
copies of the Constitution in your pocket. 
 Madam, from the Preamble of the Cons titution to Part III on Fundamental 
Rights, ample provisions have been provided  to protect the interests of minorities.  
Our Constitution does not discriminate between citizens on the basis of religion.  That 
is the position of the BJP as well.  It rega rds all Indians as citizens and not as certain 
identities that can be manipulated, divided or bought.   Like the hon. Prime Minister 
mentioned in his speech in the Lok Sabh a, the Congress overturned the Supreme 
Court decision in Shah Bano case because th ey felt it might appeal to the hardliner 
elements of the Muslim community. They pandered to the revanchist and anti-
progressive elements of the Muslim communi ty. In reality, they failed our Muslim 
sisters and brought a regressive law whic h would not have passed muster in any 
Islamic country of the world.  This was completely against the letter and spirit of the 
Constitution.  To the Congress, minori ty welfare has just  been a slogan of 
appeasement.  For the Modi Government, it is about inclusive development of every 
citizen.  Facts speak for themselves. It was the Modi Government which abolished the 
inhuman practice of triple talaq to offer a life of equality and dignity for millions of 
Muslim women. The Modi Government has provided employment and self-
employment opportunities to crores of members of minority communities.  The 
minorities have immensely benefited from various schemes of the Central 
Government.  Anywhere between 22 per cent and 37 per cent beneficiaries of the 
Mudra Yojana, Jan-Dhan Yojana, Ayushman Bharat, Kisan Samman Nidhi, Ujwala 
Yojana and the Swachh Bharat Mission belong to minorities.  In some regions, up to 
60 per cent of the benefits have been receive d by the minority community directly. To 
those who suggested that th e Constitution provides Suraksha Kavach  to citizens, I 
would ask them what the Government di d when 3,000 members of my community, 
innocent Sikhs, were killed in cold blood on  the streets of Delhi.   The then newly 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
appointed Prime Minister made this callous statement -- जब भी कोई बड़ा पेड़ िगरता है, 
तो धरती थोड़ी िहलती है। What cold-hearted indifference wi th regard to constitutional 
values!  The lives of thousands of Sikhs were equated to an afterthought.   It fell upon 
the Modi Government to provide justice to  the families of the gruesome tragedy, 
including providing financial relief of 5 lakh  rupees to each fam ily and bringing the 
perpetrators to book. Their cases had not been pursued for many decades and were 
taken up after the Modi Government came to power.  I am surprised how several 
members of the Sikh community in the Congress party continue to associate 
themselves with a party that desecrated  Sri Harmandir Sahib.  That also was 
responsible for the cold-bl ooded killing of 3,000 member s of my community. On the 
other hand, in Afghanistan, it was the Mo di Government that rescued thousands of 
Sikhs.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI  KIRAN  CHOUDHRY) : Please conclude.  
Your time is up.   
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :   S i r ,  m y  p a r t y  i s  g i v i n g  m e  i t s  t i m e .   I t  i s  t h e  M o d i  
Government which started celebrating 26
th December as Veer Bal Diwas to honour 
the brave sacrifices of the Chote Sahibzade, the two younger sons of Guru Gobind 
Singh ji, who chose to be bricked alive by Wazir Khan, the Mughal Faujdar of Sirhind.  
Since we were talking about the treatment of minorities, I have with me a press report 
on an open letter that hon. Nadda ji, the President of the BJ P and an hon. Minister, 
wrote in 2022 on violence against minorities in Congress-ruled States.  I shall list them 
from there; Gujarat in 1969, Moradabad in 1980, Bhiwandi in 1984, Meerut in 1987, 
various incidents against Hindus in the Kashmir valley through the 1980s, Bhagalpur in 
1989 and Hubli in 1994. The list of communal violence during Congress rule is long.  
This was an open letter which is on record and which I recommend to be read by all 
members of the Congress Party who try to lect ure us on the treatment of minorities.  
The BJP has had a very different run and a very different approach and BJP-ruled 
States provide ample evidence of that. I will now try to go a little forward.  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY): Please conclude.  
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI : I will conclude in a minute, Madam.  I have with me 
here a press report which I think is of Fe bruary, 1980, about 44 years ago.  Since we 
are talking about Constitution and its fede ral structure, nine State Assemblies were 
dissolved overnight!  ...(Interruptions)...Nine State Assemblies were dissolved 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
85

 
 
overnight! Article 356 was used by that pa rty 100 times and by one particular Prime 
Minister more than 50 times. ...(Interruptions)...Since we are now ready to listen to 
some introspection which we should, I have  before me a book – PMO Diary: Prelude 
to the Emergency.  I will just read out what the author says in this book.  The author 
was a very distinguished Civil Servant, Shri B.N. Tandon, who served in the Prime 
Minister’s Office as a Joint Secretary and he said, "A cloud of fascism and 
dictatorship is hovering over the country. The Prime Minister will not flinch from 
anything to maintain herself in power. This could prove to be a big danger to our 
democracy. Individual liberties can be quas hed."  This is one of their own persons 
writing.  I want to conclude finally.   
 The  hon. Leader of the Opposition gave  us gratuitous advice, including on the 
First Amendment and he said that we shou ld go behind what is  said.  I did some 
research in the time after he spoke.  He s eems to say almost in th is nature that what 
my senior colleague, the Finance Minister, sa id about the curtailment of the Right to 
Freedom of Speech is not correct.  I would suggest him to read the First Constitution 
Amendment Bill in 1951 which had a clear inte ntion to curtail the Right to Freedom of 
Speech.  Whatever may be the reasons or what went behind it, as quoted by the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, was to curtail th e Right to Freedom of  Speech of citizens 
very clearly.  In Article 19, they wanted a cl ause to give effect to this curtailment and 
this is what they achieved.  The excuse given today by the distinguished hon. Leader 
of the Opposition was that they were made to do it because of the Supreme Court.  
You could have gone to the Supreme Court and said that democracy and freedom of 
speech is fundamental. ...(Interruptions)...You should be able to resist it.  
...(Interruptions)...There are occasions when we ar e also asked by the Supreme 
Court. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: He is misleading the House. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY): Please conclude. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI : We stand our ground when it is important. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY): Please conclude. 
...(Interruptions)...Your time is over. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI : There is a provision.  ...(Interruptions)...I will make 
these papers available to you whenever you want. Thank you.  
  
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI   KIRAN CHOUDHRY): Shri Mukul Balkrishna 
Wasnik; this is his maiden speech.  
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक (राजÎथान) : मैडम, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का 
मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। 
मैडम, मȅने पहले क े क ु छ वƪाओं को सुना।  सǄा दल से दो वƪाओं ने अपने िवचार यहां 
पर रखे।  उन्हȗने अपने बयान मȂ संिवधान क े Ģित आÎथा जािहर की, िजसकी वजह से मुझे बेहद 
खुशी हुई, लेिकन उन्हȗने यहां पर िजस तरह से अपनी बातȂ रखीं, उससे मुझे क ु छ परेशानी भी 
होती है। आज जो सǄा दल मȂ बैठे हȅ, उनका भारत क े संिवधान क े िनमार्ण मȂ दूर-दूर तक कोई 
संबंध नहीं था।  आज जो सǄा दल मȂ बैठे हȅ, उनका भारत क े Îवाधीनता संगर्ाम मȂ दूर-दूर तक 
कोई संबंध नहीं था। लेिकन, आज िजस तरह से वे यहां पर अपनी बातȂ कह रहे हȅ, ऐसा लगता है 
िक संिवधान भी उन्हȗने ही बनाया, भारत की आजादी भी उन्हȗने ही हािसल की।  मुझे खुशी हुई 
िक उन्हȗने यहां पर डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर क े िलए क ु छ अच्छे बोल बोले हȅ।  मुझे इस बात की 
भी खुशी हुई िक सǄा दल क े सािथयȗ ने यहां पर सरदार पटेल का नाम भी बड़े सÇमानजनक 
तरीके  से लेने का काम िकया है।  लेिकन, देश क े Ģथम Ģधान मंतर्ी जवाहरलाल नेहरू  क े संदभर् मȂ 
जब उन्हȗने अपनी बात कही, चाहे वे िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी हȗ या हरदीप पुरी जी हȗ, उन्हȗने 
िजस ढंग से अपनी बात कही, उससे मुझे इस बात की हैरत हुई िक नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ इतनी 
घृणा और इतने ǎेष भरे िवचार सǄा दल मȂ क्यȗ इस तरह से नजर आते हȅ? 
 क्या जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने बहुत बड़ा अपराध िकया था िक Îवाधीनता क े संगर्ाम मȂ 
उन्हȗने 9 साल से अिधक का समय भारत की जेलȗ मȂ काटा? क्या ज वाहरलाल नेहरू  जी का यह 
अपराध था िक 1929 को लाहौर मȂ रावी क े तट पर रात क े अंधेरे मȂ भारत का ध्वज लहराया और 
इस बात का एलान िकया िक अब हम पूणर् Îवराज क े िलए तैयार हȅ, अब हमारा संघषर् पूणर् Îवराज 
हािसल िकए बगैर नहीं रुके गा? क्या जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी का यह अपराध था िक यहीं बगल मȂ 
सȂटर्ल हॉल मȂ उन्हȗने 13 िदसÇबर, 1946 को संिवध
ान सभा मȂ ऑÅजेिक्टËस का िरज़ॉÊयूशन रखा? 
क्या जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी का यह अपराध था िक उन्हȗने आधुिनक भारत क े िनम ार्ण की नींव 
रखी? मȅ समझता हूं िक यह सारा ǎेष, ये सारी नफ़रत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी क े Ģित इसिलए है, 
क्यȗिक जब भारत का िवभाजन हुआ, इÎलाम क े नाम पर जब पािकÎतान बना, तब िहन्दुÎतान मȂ 
भी कई िहन्
दू पािकÎतान िनमार्ण करने क े पक्षधर थे, िजसके  िखलाफ जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने 
अपनी पूरी ताकत झȗक दी। ...(Ëयवधान)... क्या कभी िहन्दुÎतान यह भूल सकता है? 
...(Ëयवधान)... क्या कभी िहन्दुÎतान यह भूल सकता है िक िवभाजन क े िदनȗ मȂ 5 लाख से अिधक 
लोगȗ की मौत हुई, 60 लाख से अिधक लोग िवÎथािपत हुए, लेिकन वहां देश क े Ģथम Ģधान मंतर्ी 
अपने तमाम साथी, सरदार वÊलभभाई पटेल, मौलाना आज़ाद, डा. राजेन्दर् Ģसाद आिद क े साथ 
भारत मȂ शांित बनाने का काम कर रहे थे। 500 से  अिथक princely States
 थे, उनको भारत क े 
साथ जोड़ना था। कÌमीर क े क्या हालात थे? यहां हरदीप िंसह पुरी जी िजस तरह से बात कर रहे 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
87

 
 
थे, ऐसा लगता है िक इितहास से इनका कोई सरोकार नहीं रहा। कÌमीर की हालत िंचताजनक 
हो गई थी। ऐसे हालात मȂ पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी और देश की पहली सरकार ने जो फ ैसले 
िकए, मȅ समझता हूं िक बड़े सÇमान से उन्हȂ यहां याद करने की आवÌयकता है, लेिकन सǄा दल 
से बहुत įयादा उÇमीद करना – मȅ नहीं समझता हूं िक मुनािसब होगा।  
  महोदय, संिवधान सभा मȂ 299 सदÎ
य थे, 70 रजवाड़ȗ क े सदÎय, 208 का ंगर्ेस पाटीर् क े 
सदÎय थे और बचे हुए 21 सदÎय अन्य दूसरे दलȗ क े थे, िजसमȂ सीपीआई थी और Scheduled 
Castes Federation
 भी था। Scheduled Castes Federation से  बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर जी 
संिवधान सभा मȂ आए थे और संिवधान सभा मȂ आने क े बाद, कांगर्ेस पाटीर् का संिवधान सभा मȂ पूणर् 
बहुमत होने क े बाद, Îवाधीनता क े आंदोलन का नेतृत्व करने क े बाद िज
स तरह की िÎथित थी, 
उस समय संिवधान सभा ने यह फ ैसला िकया िक हम बहुमत और अÊपमत नहीं देखȂगे, हम यह 
देखȂगे िक िकसमȂ क्या कािबिलयत है और िहन्दुÎतान क े िनमार्ण मȂ हम उनका पूरा उपयोग करȂगे। 
जब 29 अगÎत, 1947 को मसौदा सिमित की घोषणा हुई, तब वहां शेǹूल  काÎट फ ेडरेशन क े 
एकमातर् सदÎय बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर उस सिमित क े अध्यक्ष चुने जाते हȅ। 25 नवÇबर, 1949 
को संिवध
ान सभा मȂ हुए संिवधान पर जो बहस चली थी, उसका जवाब देते हुए बाबा साहेब डा. 
अÇबेडकर कहते हȅ िक संिवधान सभा मȂ आने क े पीछे मेरा बड़ा मयार्िदत उǈेÌय था। वह उǈेÌय था 
िक मȅ अनुसूिचत जाित
यȗ क े Ëयिƪयȗ क े अिधकारȗ की रक्षा करूं ।  मुझे तब आÌचयर् हुआ, जब 
मसौदा सिमित का सदÎय चुना गया और मुझे तब और भी आÌचयर् हुआ, जब मुझे मसौद ा सिमित 
का अध्यक्ष चुना गया।  
 ये बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर क े बोल हȅ।  बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर की जो क्षमता थी, जो 
बुिǉमǄा थी, जो िवǎता थी, उन्हȂ पूरी दुिनया का ज्ञान ĢाÃत था और एक समाज क े िकनारे पर 
खड़े हुए Ëयिƪ, िजन्हȗने अपनी कािबिलयत से पूरी दुिनया मȂ नाम कमाया था, उसका उपयोग 
हमारा संिवध
ान बनाने मȂ संिवधान सभा ने पूरी तरह से िकया।  अंगर्ेज क्या कहते थे? अंगर्ेज़ यह 
कहते थे िक िंहदुÎतान राÍटर् नहीं बन सकता, िंहदुÎतान एक भौगोिलक अिभËयिƪ है, 
geographical expression है, यह कभी राÍटर् नहीं बन सकता।  यहां इतनी भाषाएं हȅ, इतने 
रीित-िरव
ाज हȅ, इतने धमर् हȅ, लेिकन हमारा Îवाधीनता आंदोलन inclusive  था, secular था, 
pro-poor था।  यह आंदोलन तमाम लोगȗ को साथ मȂ लेकर िंहदुÎतान क े िन मार्ण क े काम मȂ लगा 
था। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
SHRI  RAM CHANDER JANGRA (Haryana) : Madam, I have a point of order.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Mr. Jangra, this is his 
maiden speech.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा:  माननीय सदÎय, जो सूचना दे रहे हȅ।…(Ëयवधान)…  
 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी) : जांगड़ा जी, आप उन्हȂ बोलने दीिजए।  यह उनकी मेडेन 
Îपीच है।  आप उनके  बाद बोल लीिजएगा। …(Ëयवधान)… आप उनके  बाद बोिलएगा।…(Ëयवधान)… 
वासिनक जी की पहली Îपीच है, तो आप उनके  बाद बोल लीिजएगा। …( Ëयवधान)… जांगड़ा 
साहब, आप दो िमनट बैिठए। 
 
Ǜी नीरज डां
गी: आप रूल  पिढ़ए। आप मेडेन Îपीच मȂ इंटरÃशन कर रहे हȅ।…(Ëयवधान)…  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): जांगड़ा जी, आप दो िमनट बैिठए।  Y e s ,  p l e a s e  
continue. …(Interruptions)… Mr. Wasnik, please continue. …(Interruptions)… Mr. 
Wasnik, I will allow him then. …(Interruptions)… Yes, Mr. Wasnik. 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ समझता था िक मुझे आपका पूरा संरक्षण 
िमलेगा, लेिकन इसमȂ थोड़ा-सा Ëयवधान जरूर  हुआ है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): आपको पूरा संरक्षण िमला है, तभी आप बोल रहे हȅ।  आप 
बोिलए।   
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर का भारत क े संिवधान क े िनमार्ण मȂ 
संिवधान सभा ने पूरा उपयोग िकया है।  उस समय क े यूरोप मȂ क्या था?  वहां भाषा क े नाम पर, 
धमर् क े नाम पर आधुिनक राÍटर्ȗ का िनमार्ण हो रहा था,  चाहे ģांस हो,  जम र्नी हो या इटली हो।  
भारत का Îवाधीन
ता आंदोलन अपने आप मȂ अनोखा था।  ऐसा दुिनया मȂ उस दरिमयान नहीं हो 
रहा था।  हमारे Îवाधीनता संगर्ाम क े नेताओं ने यह तय िकया िक भारत को अगर गुलामी से  मुƪ 
करना है, तो यह िकसी एक धमर् क े लोगȗ क े िलए नह
ीं रहेगा, यह तमाम लोगȗ क े िलए रहेगा, यह 
समाज मȂ उन लोगȗ क े िलए भी रहेगा, जो समाज मȂ आज अÎपृÌय जाने जाते हȅ और छ ुआछू त क े 
िशकार होते हȅ, ऐसे लोगȗ क े िलए भी िंहदुÎतान आज़ाद बनेगा।   
 महोदय,  यहा ं िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी मिहलाओं क े िलए बहुत बा
तȂ करके  चली 
गईं।…(Ëयवधान)…  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : One minute.  
…(Interruptions)… This is his maiden speech. …(Interruptions)…  Please allow him to 
speak. …(Interruptions)…  Mr. Wasnik, carry on.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वास
 िनक:  िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने यहां पर मिहलाओं क े बारे मȂ बहुत-सी 
बातȂ कहीं िक उनको आरक्षण िमले, हमारा भी यही ख्याल रहा है।  इस पर हमने भी काम िकया।  
अगर आप करȂगे, तो हम पूरी तरह आपके  साथ रहȂगे।  इसमȂ कोई दो राय नहीं हो सकती हȅ, 
लेिकन क्या हमने आज तक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् का मिहलाओं का नेतृत्व देखा है? राÍटर्ीय Îतर 
पर आज तक हमने नहीं देखा है िक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की मिहला, भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
89

 
 
अध्यक्ष बनी हो।  राÍटर्ीय Îवयं सेवक संघ, जहां से इनकी पूरी वैचािरक धरोहर है,  राÍटर्ीय Îवयं 
सेवक संघ, िजसके  अभी अगले साल 100 साल पूरे हȗगे…   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Please speak on the 
Constitution. …(Interruptions)…  Please speak on the Constitution. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक:  क्या आपने राÍटर्ीय Îवंयसेवक संघ की सरसंचालक िक
 सी मिहला 
को देखा है? आज तक कोई नहीं बनी है। …(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): आप कांÎटीǷूशन पर बोिलए। Please speak on the 
subject. …(Interruptions)… No, you are digressing. Please speak on the subject. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK : Madam, I have the right to speak. 
…(Interruptions)…If anybody is going to attack th e Congress Party and if they are 
going to think that we are not going to rebut, then, that is absolutely wrong. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY): You have the right. But 
you have the right to speak only on the subject that is being discussed. 
…(Interruptions)… You have the right to speak on the subject that is given. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक : मȅ आप
स े पूरे आदर और सÇमान क े साथ कहूँगा िक जब कांगर्ेस 
का नाम िलया गया था, अगर आप उन्हȂ तब रोक देते, तो मȅ भी चुप रहता, मȅने अपनी वाणी पर 
इनका नाम नहीं आने िदया होता।  
मैडम, राÍटर्ीय Îवयंसेवक संघ क े अगले वषर् सौ साल पूरे हȗगे, लेिकन पुरुषȗ क े अलावा 
वहाँ पर मिहला सदÎय नहीं बन सक
ती है। राÍटर्ीय Îवयंसेवक संघ मȂ  Îवयंसेवक िसफर् पुरुष ही 
हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPE
RSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Mr. Wasnik, please.  
…(Interruptions)… आप कांÎटीǷूशन पर बोिलए।…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: उनकी राÍटर्ीय सेिवका नाम से एक अलग संÎथा है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): इसका कांÎटीǷूशन से क ु छ लेना-देना नहीं है।  
 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: मȅ नहीं समझता हूं िक मिहलाओं क े बारे मȂ इन्हȗने ऐसा क ु छ िकया 
है। कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने एनी बेसȂट, सरोिजनी नायडू से लेकर तमाम अध्यक्ष Îवाधीनता से पहले देखीं 
और उसके  बाद भी देखी। जवाहरलाल नेहरू  ने िज स तरह से भारत की नींव रखी और िजस तरह 
से हमारी संिवधान सभा ने, िजसमȂ बाबा साहेब भीमराव अÇबेडकर की एक अत्यंत ही महत्वपूणर् 
भूिमका रही है, मȅ बड़े गौरव से साथ, बड़े अिभमान और शान क े साथ कह सकता हूं िक भ ारत, जो 
आज भी आज़ाद है, भारत, िजसकी आज भी एकता बनी हुई है, आज वह सब क ु छ इस संिवधान 
की वजह से मुमिकन हुआ है अन्यथा भारत मȂ इतनी भाषाएं, इतने रीित-िरवाज़ और इतने धमर् हȅ 
िक मȅ नहीं समझता हूं िक हम इतनी मजबूती से आगे बढ़ पाते। हमȂ बड़ा गौरव है िक आज हमने 
सबसे बड़
ा लोकतंतर् बनकर दुिनया मȂ अपनी जगह पाई है। मȅ उÇमीद करता हूं िक अगर हम 
भारतीय संिवधान क े राÎते पर चलते रहȂगे, तो और अि
धक मजबूत हȗगे एवं दुिनया मȂ अपना नाम 
और अिधक रोशन करने मȂ कामयाब हȗगे।  
महोदया, राजीव जी क े बारे मȂ यहाँ बात कही गई िक इंिदरा जी की हत्या होने क े बाद वह ाँ 
पर िकस तरह की िÎथित पैदा हुई। यहाँ इंिदरा गाँधी जी का शव रखा था, कोई िगन भी लेता िक 
इंिदरा गाँधी जी को अपनी छाती पर िकतनी गोिलयाँ झेलनी पड़ी थीं? कोई यह भी कह देता िक 
उस समय क े क्या हालात थे, िजनमȂ इंिदरा गाँधी जी को कठोर फ ैसले लेने पड़े थे। यहाँ माँ की  
लाश – जो मुÊक की Ģधान मंतर्ी थीं, उनकी पूरी छाती छलनी हुई पड़ी थी और राजीव गाँधी जी, 
जहाँ दंगे भड़के  थे, वहाँ माहौल शांत कर
ने क े िलए िदÊली की सड़कȗ पर िनकले थे।  
…(Ëयवधान)… इतना ही नहीं, िनमर्ला जी ने यहाँ पर कहा था .. (समय की घंटी) ...   
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर:  आप  संिवधान पर बोिलए।    …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY): Please conclude. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: नीरज शेखर जी, ये आपके  िपता थे। …(Ëयवधान)… राम मनोहर 
लोिहया हॉिÎपटल मȂ जब संजय गाँधी का शव पहुँचा, तब इंिदरा जी वहाँ पहुँचीं और चन्दर्शेखर 
जी क े साथ बात करने लगीं िक हम पंजाब क े हालात को क ै से सुधारȂगे? आप क्या बात कर रहे हȅ? 
पहले इितहास को जान
ने की कोिशश कीिजए। िनमर्ला जी ने यहाँ पर कहा है। …( Ëयव धान)… 
मैडम, मȅ आपका संरक्षण चाहूंगा।  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Y o u r  t i m e  i s  o v e r .  
Please conclude. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: िनमर्ला जी ने यहाँ पर फÎटर् अमȂडमȂट इन िद कांÎटीǷूशन को 
लेकर बात कही।  
 जो पहला अमȂडमȂट लाया गया था, तब जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी Ģधान मंतर्ी थे, तो यह 
िनिÌचत ही उनकी िज
Çमेदारी थी। जब काँÎटीǷूशन अमȂडमȂट पेश कर रहे थे, तब वे  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
91

 
 
Statements of Objects and Reasons मȂ क्या कहते हȅ –"The citizen's right to freedom of 
speech and expression guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) has been held by some courts 
to be so comprehensive as not to render a person culpable even if he advocates 
murder and other crimes of violence. In ot her countries with written constitutions, 
freedom of speech and of the press is no t regarded as debarring the State from 
punishing or preventing abuse of this freedom." वे आगे इसके  ऑÅजैक्ट्स पूरे िवÎतार से 
रखते हȅ।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY):  Please conclude.  Your 
time is over. You have taken more than 15 minutes. 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: डा. अÇबेडकर भी इस अमȂडमȂट क े समथर्न मȂ पूरे दो घंटे अपनी 
बात रखते हȅ और नेहरू  जी ने जो भूिमका रखी, उसका पूरा समथर्न कर
ते हȅ। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
हम 1951 मȂ आिर्टकल 15(4) ले कर आए। हम 2006 मȂ 15(5) लेकर आए, िजसके  जिरए दिलत, 
आिदवासी और िपछड़ समाज क े लोगȗ को Ģाइवेट एंड पिÅलक एजुक ेशनल इंÎटीǷूशन मȂ 
आरक्षण िदया है। आगे ह
मारा Ģयास रहेगा िक जो 50 परस Ȃट आरक्षण की मयार्दा सुĢीम कोटर् ने 
दिलत, आिदवासी और िपछड़ȗ पर रखी है, उसे अलग करके , हम इन वगș को और अिधक 
सुिवधा उपलÅध कराएं।       
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPE
RSON (SHRIMATI KI RAN CHOUDHRY):  Thank you, Mr. 
Wasnik.  Now, Ms. Dola Sen.  Dola Senji will speak in Bengali.  …(Interruptions)… हाँ, 
हाँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़ आप बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: संिवधान की Ģारूप सिमित क े िवषय को लेकर माननीय सदÎय ने िजकर् 
िकया है... ...(Ëयवधान)...
 
 
एक माननीय सांसद: रूल  कौन सा है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: रूल  258 है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मैडम, रूल  258 है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: मेरी बात सुन लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... पंिडत नेहरू  अंतरराÍटर्ीय ख्
 याित ĢाÃत 
िवǎान Sir Ivor Jennings को  संिवधान सभा का काम सȚपना चाहते थे, लेिकन गाँधी जी ने यह 
कहा िक यह देश क े िलए Ǜम का िवषय है। ...(Ëयवधान)... दुिनया सोचेगी िक यहाँ कोई भी 
संिवधान का िवÌलेषक नहीं है, तब जा कर गाँधी जी ने जोर देकर अÇबेडर जी का नाम िदलवाया 
था। ये नेहरू  जी को गलत कर् ेिडट दे रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN (West Bengal) :  Thank you Vice-Chairman, Madam.   
Thanks to our hon. Leader and my Party, All India Trinamool Congress, for giving me 
this chance to speak on Constitution of Indi a. I will try to deliver my speech in my 
mother-tongue Bangla.   
 
[THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) in the Chair] 
 
  
#"Madam Vice Chairperson, we have decided from All India Trinamool 
Congress that all our MPs will talk about th e various points in the preamble of the 
Constitution. After Saket’s Justice or Nyay, my point is "We the people of India’’ for 
AITC, the All India Trinamool Congress. We the people of India, we are jana-gana. 
Who are they? Who are we, the people of India? We, the People of India, mean those 
labourers, migrant workers, who had to walk thousands of miles following the sudden 
lockdown announced  by  the  Union  Government  in  the   wake of COVID pandemic. 
They walked, they died and they got washed away in the Ganges. They were burnt on 
the banks of Ganges so that no one knows about their COVID death. 
We, the People of India, mean those fellow citizens who died unfortunately 
standing in bank queues after the suddenly announced demonetization by the Union 
Government, but not a single rupee of black money was recovered.  
We, the People of India, are our more than 850 farmer friends, brothers and 
sisters, who were legally and peacefully protesting against the anti-farmer Farm Act at 
the Delhi border, and who lost their lives in  brutal attacks by police backed by Union 
Government. The farmers still have not got the Minimum Support Price (MSP) even 
though the Prime minister had promised it. 
 We, the People of India, are our 59 lakh MGNREGA Job Card workers, who, 
toiled for their hard earned crores of rupees for two years, are still awaiting the release 
of the same from the Union Government whereas three years have already been 
passed.  
We, the People of India, are our unfort unate mothers, brothers and sisters of 
Manipur who, for the last one and a half y ears, have been faci ng the burning issue 
homelessly. Even though the mothers and sisters survived in any way being heckled 
brutally, the Prime Minister did not go to meet them for a while.  
                                         
#English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
93

 
 
We, the People of India, are the 10 crore ordinary people of our Bengal, who 
were deprived by the Union Government by taking the money of the State and not 
returning their shares.  
We, the People of India, are the 25 per cent fresh youth of our population who 
are jobless, unemployed. Two crore jobs we re promised in a year, and 20 crore jobs 
in ten years were supposed to be there,  but the same did not not happen despite 
PM’s promise.  
We, the People of India, are our lakhs of employees, who have lost their jobs 
due to disinvestment, corporatization policy of the Union Government, and it 
comprised even those who had cleared up ex ams to join profitable PSUs and public 
enterprises, and they are not getting the benefit of Old Pensio n Scheme even, as 
Union Government stopped OPS.  
We, the People of India, are those cror es of countrymen who have to bear the 
10% increase in the food prices to feed his family.  
We, the People of India, are the brot hers and sisters from the indigenous 
water-forest land, who have to survive with their families despite having a very low 
income, these Adivasi friends, brothers an d sisters, Dalit friends, brothers and 
sisters, friends, brothers and sisters fr om the minority community are still lagging 
behind the rest of us. They are deprived of  all rights including education even after 75 
years of Independence in this Viksit Bharat. 
  We, the People of India, are our commo n people who have to suffer as 50% of 
the wealth is being owned by our 1% populati on. Most of the rest of the people have 
to struggle a lot in today’s Vikisit Bharat with acche din.  
We the People of India,  are our outstanding figh ter, the commoner and very 
good administrator, Mamata Banerjee, who had to struggle a lot in her early days, 
this great mass leader Mamata Banerjee and her grassroot workers, who always 
remain pro-people against the anti-peopl e policies of this Union Government, and 
they keep fighting for – "We, the People of India" inside Parliament and outside in 
the field. 
  We, the People of India, believe, people are above all of us, and it is the truth 
also. So people fight, die fighting but in the end, 'people' is the last word in the final 
judgement in our livelihood in our beloved India."    
                                       
SHRI N.R. ELANGO (Tamil Nadu) :  Esteemed Members of the Rajya Sabha, I stand 
before you today to commemorate 75 years of  our Constitution’s adoption. That I, 
from a humble background, can address this august House, is itself a testament to 
the transformative power of our demo cracy, made possible by the Dravidian 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Movement and its leaders and countless other champions of social justice who 
envisioned India as a federal democratic republic.  
 I am reminded of a moment in history when Benjamin Franklin, emerging from 
the American Constitutional Convention, was asked whether they had bestowed upon 
their nation a monarchy or a republic.  Hi s response resonates deeply with our own 
journey today.  He replied, "A republic, if you can keep it". These words echo with 
profound relevance for India today. Today, we must ask ourselves: Are we preserving 
its basic structure for future generations?  Are we upholding the federal democratic 
republic, as envisaged by the founding fathers?  
 M a d a m  C h a i r p e r s o n ,  w e  h a v e  t o  h a v e  t h i s  d e b a t e  b e y o n d  p o l i t i c s .   I t  i s  n o t  
‘us’ versus ‘you’.  It is ‘we’  versus ‘future’.  The pressing question before us today is 
whether we the people of 2024 will preserve  and pass on to future generations the 
same Constitution, with its basic structure in tact, that ‘the People of India’ bestowed 
upon us in 1950. As we mark this historic  milestone, I must bring to this House’s 
attention  a few critical challenges.  First is the integrity of our electoral system.  The 
recent Chief Election Commissioner and Elec tion Commissioners Appointment Act of 
2023 has fundamentally altered the judgem ent of the Supreme Court replacing the 
Chief Justice of India with a Cabinet Minister.  A pliable Election Commission serves 
as a gateway to power consolidation, striking at democracy’s heart.  The  
Commission’s recent reluctance to act against Model Code violations and to 
investigate forced withdrawal of nominations raises serious concerns about its 
autonomy.  The working of EVMs have to be put under greater scrutiny.   The Union 
Government has to rethink and withdraw th e Bill on One Nation, One Election, as it 
poses great threat to democracy.  Second, the federal structure of our Constitution 
faces unprecedented strain, partic ularly, on fiscal relations.  Third, our approach on 
water sharing between States require immedi ate attention.  The River Boards Act has 
to be implemented with rigour.  I request the Union to ponder over giving effect to the 
River Boards Act, 1956. ( Time-bell rings )  Just a minute, Madam.   The  Directive 
Principles of State Policy is another area of our concern.   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): Your time is up. 
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO: One minute, Madam. 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Now, hon. 
Member, Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
95

 
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO: Just one more minute, Madam. I will conclude. 
   
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :   Okay. Please 
conclude in half a minute. 
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO: Madam, though an atheist, Arignar Anna, said, 
# which means, 
‘you can see God in the smiles of the poor’.    But, unfortunately, now, some people 
are searching for their God underneath the ma sk.  I say that fraternity is the most 
important part of our Constitution and we have…    
                                                    
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Now,  Shri 
Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli. 
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI (Andhra Pradesh) : Respected Vice-
Chairman, Madam, I had given a letter to hon. Chairman. Please arrange for 
translation.  
   
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :   It has already 
been done. 
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI : 
#"Hon. Vice-Chairperson Madam, I am very 
happy to participate in the Discussion on  the "Glorious Journey of 75 years of the 
Constitution of India". This discussion is happening after a very long time. If we look 
at our experiences with a Constitution that  is 75 years old, our Government needs to 
think about how many injustices and anarch y have happened in this country during 
these 75 years.  If we look at people who are 75 years of age, we find that they are 
suffering from high blood pressure, diab etes, kidney problems and various other 
diseases. All these diseases have come to India in the last 75 years. All kinds of 
diseases have come and the Government has done nothing to control them.  
We should remember what Ambedkar s a i d  w h e n  h e  f i r st introduced the 
Constitution in the Parliament. He predicted a lot in advance as to what would happen 
in India from the moment the Constitution  would come into force. Dr. Ambedkar 
addressed the Constituent Assembly that day and said that from January 26, 1950, 
                                         
#English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
we the Indians, are entering a life of divers ity. Equality in politics will be achieved, but 
economic inequality will remain the same. Some  of them will be rich on one hand and 
on the other, there will be poor people wh o would constantly struggle with poverty. In 
other words, our society has been built on the foundations of economic inequality. If 
we continue to run roughshod over soci al equality and economic equality, this 
Constitution will fail, and the democracy we  have achieved through the Constitution 
will be in danger. We should keep all these things in mind. The caste system has 
become a big issue for the country. There are different castes, religions, traditions, 
and cultures in our country. Dr. Ambedkar al so warned, that as jealousy and hatred 
increase, differences increase. If we do not attain unity in the nation, we will not be 
able to overcome the hatred and indiffere nces. And the freedom we have achieved 
will be incomplete. What are we doing today? What is being done by the Government 
about this? We should recollect all thes e. Even after 75 years, these racial 
discrimination or caste inequa lities are continuing. What is the root cause of it? It is 
very necessary to identify the root cause and stop it. The earlier Governments which 
come to power, had never addressed these issues. Similarly, our democracy has 
come anew. In the year 1950, we declared  our country as a republic country. We do 
not know what democracy means. For a long time, democracy was not there in India. 
In the absence of all these, we will remain entangled into many hurdles." 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON  KONYAK) : Kindly conclude. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI  : 
#"There are a few reasons why I am talking 
about it today. I will explain them to you. Article 16 (1) is about social justice. Article 
14 provides for equal opportunities for all. As  per Article 16 (4), ef ficiency should also 
be given top priority. This was Ambedkar's  idea.  But, what happened? Apart from 
Brahmins, Vaishyas, Kshatriyas and a few ot hers, not everyone has been able to get 
proper,  equal opportunities."         
                                                       
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON  KONYAK) : Shrimati Sulata 
Deo.  
 
                                         
# English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
97

 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव (ओिडशा):  Hon. Madam, thank you so much.    हमारे लीडर Ǜी नवीन 
पटनायक जी को भी धन्यवाद, िजन्हȗने मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने क े िलए भेजा है।  मेरे पास बोलने क े 
िलए ज्यादा टाइम नहीं है, मेरे पास 4 िमनट का ही समय है।  मȅ डायरेक्ट मुǈे पर आती हूँ।   
मैडम, मȅ एक quote-unquote बोल रही हूँ। 1998 मȂ एनडीए की सरकार थी।  वह सरकार 
चल रही थी, लेिकन क ु छ लोगȗ का, एक पिरवार का 'हम नहीं, तो को
ई नहीं' का जो खेल चल 
रहा है, वह अटल जी की सरकार को अिÎथर करने क े िलए खेला गया। उसमȂ वोिंटग हुई।  
खरीद-फरोख्त तब भी हो सकती थी, बाजार मȂ माल तब भी िबकता था, लेिकन संिवधान की 
भावना क े Ģित समिर्पत अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार ने एक वोट से हारना पसंद िकया, 
इÎतीफा दे िदया, लेिकन असंवैधािन
क तरीका नहीं अपनाया।  मȅ यहाँ अटल जी को नमन करती 
हूँ, इस संिवधान को नमन करती हूँ, इस सभागृह को, इस हाउस को नमन करती हूँ, मगर मुझे 
इस पर ऐतराज़ है िक जब माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने लोक सभा मȂ यह बात बोली िक हम माल हȅ, 
तो मैडम, माल कौन है?  यहाँ माल कौन है?   
 हम लोग एमपी थे। हम लोग अटल जी का सÇमान इसिलए करते थे, क्यȗिक वे हमȂ एमपी 
समझते थे, इसीिलए उन्हȗने एक वोट से हारना सही समझा, मगर उन्हȗने खरीदारी नहीं की।  
आज हम लो
गȗ को माल बोला जा रहा है। मुझे इस माल बोलने से ऐतराज है। हम एमपीज़ को माल 
बोला गया।...(Ëयवधान)...  यह  सही नहीं है।  मुझे  एमपी की खरीद-िबकर्ी से भी ऐ तराज है।  
मैडम, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा जो बात कही गई, उससे हमȂ बहुत ज्यादा दुख हुआ।  
उन्हȗने यह भी बोला िक यह हमारा इितहास है, हमारा संÎक ार है, हमारी परंपरा है।  आज ये सब 
कहाँ गए?  वह संÎकार और परंपरा कहाँ गयी?  इसिलए हमने बोला िक हमȂ ऐतराज है, क्यȗिक 
आज हमारी पाटीर् से जो इÎतीफा दे रहे हȅ, आप उनको अपनी पाटीर् मȂ ले रहे हȅ।  आप ही क े 
िहसाब से जो माल है, वही िबकता है, हम नह
ीं िबकȂ गे।   हममȂ से कोई एमपीज़ नहीं िबकȂ गे।  
इसीिलए मȅ बोल रही हूँ िक लोक सभा मȂ जो यह बात बोली गई है, वह सही नहीं 
है।...(Ëयवधान)...    
  
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  Madam, I have a poi
nt of order. ...(Interruptions)...I have a 
point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: क्या यही हमारा संिवधान है?  क्या हमारा संिवधान हमȂ यही िसखाता है?  
इतना ही नहीं है, बिÊक मȅ एक और बात बोलना चाहती हूँ।  
  
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  Madam, I have a point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  U n d e r  w h i c h  
rule? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : मैडम, मȅ एक और बात बो
 लना चाहूँगी।...(Ëयवधान)... आप ऐसा बोल 
सकते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... ओिडशा मȂ लेिजÎलेिटव असȂबली क े Îपीकर और िडÃटी Îपीकर 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े पाटीर् ऑिफस मȂ पीएम क े साथ फोटो िंखचवा रहे हȅ।  क्या यह संिवधान 
है?  आज संिवधान की धिज्जयाँ उड़ रही हȅ।   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Hon. Member, 
please sit down.  There is a point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: मैडम, ओिडशा मȂ नई गवनर्मȂट आने क े बाद वीमेन किमशन क े चेयरमैन को 
िनकाला गया, जब िक वह एक quasi judicial bo
dy है।  गवनर्मȂट आती-जाती रहती है, लेिकन 
आपने िकस िहसाब से उनको िनकाला? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Let me request 
hon. Member, Shrimati Sulata Deo, to stop for a minute.  There is a point of order. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: मैडम, क्या यह संिवधान है?  क्या आप लोग इस तरह से संिवधान को सÇमा
 न 
देते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (ODISHA):  Madam, my point of order is under Rule 238.   
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : मैडम, हाउस मȂ हमȂ ऑनर नहीं िकया जाता है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  I would request 
Shrimati Sulata Deo to stop for a minute.   We are taking up a point of order. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : मैडम, हम जो बोल रहे हȅ, वह सच बोल रहे हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SUJE
EET KUMAR:  Madam, Rule 238 says, "A Me mber while speaking shall 
not make a personal charge against a Member."   ...(Interruptions)...Madam, she 
has to either substantiate it or withdr aw the statement. She has made personal 
remarks. If I start talking about her history, she will have no place to hide.  
...(Interruptions)...What is she talking about?  She is making personal remarks.     
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : मैडम, हमने कोई बात नहीं की, ...( Ëयवधान)... हम आज भी बोलȂगे िक 
संिवधान को सÇमान िदया जाए। अगर ऐसा होगा, तो यह िकसी क े िलए सही नहीं 
होगा।...(Ëयवधान)... हम
ारे बोलने क े समय आप िडÎटबर् कर रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक आपको कहीं न 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
99

 
 
कहीं लगा िक...(Ëयवधान)... आप एक बात सुिनए, हमारे मुख्य मंतर्ी जी, िजसने आपको यहाँ 
भेजे थे, वे आपको यहाँ क्यȗ भेजे थे, यह आप उनसे जाकर पूिछए।...(समय की घंटी)... जब 
आप नीित और नैितकता की बात बोल रहे हȅ, तो आज आपकी वह नीित और नैितकता कहाँ 
गयी? ...(Ëयव
धान)...  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Hon. Member, 
kindly take your seat. The point of order would be brought to the notice of the hon. 
Chairman.  ...(Interruptions)...Please conclude.  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Member, 
Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha. 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : आप िकसी पाटीर् क े सदÎय को तोड़ कर उसे िफर अपनी पाटीर् मȂ ले रहे हȅ 
और आप नीित, नैितकता और संिवध ान  की बात बोलते हȅ।  कहाँ है संिवधान? 
...(Ëयवधान)...संिवधान बस एक िकताब रह गया है, ...(Ëयवधान)...                       
     
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा (िबहार): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे इतने महत्वपूणर् िवषय 
पर बोलने का मौका िदया है, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।  मȅ िजस Ģदेश से आता हूँ, उस Ģदेश 
मȂ सबसे पहले लोकतंतर् की नींव िलच्छवी, वैशाली मȂ रखी गई। अिÌवनी वैÍणव साहब, सुिनए।  
आप अपने कोटे से मेरा टाइम थोड़ा बढ़वा दीिजएगा, क्यȗिक मुझे तीन िमनट्स ही िमले हȅ।  
मैडम, मȅ िजस Ģदेश से आता हूँ, जब कांिÎटटु एंट असȂबली कांÎटीǷूट की गई, तब राजेन्दर् बाबू 
को उसकी अध्यक्षता करने क े िलए चुना गया।  उस समय वहाँ क े बहुत सारे लोग, जैसे अनुगर्ह 
नारायण िंसह जी, Ǜीकृ Íण बाबू, दरभंगा क े महाराज रहे कामेÌवर िंसह जी, ये सब उसके  मेÇबसर् 
थे।  यहां पर यह चचार् हुई िक 1951 मȂ नेहरू  जी ģीडम ऑफ Îपीच क े संबंध मȂ अमȂडमȂट लेकर 
आए थे।  उस समय हमारे कामेÌवर िंसह जी, िजनकी चचार् िवǄ मंतर्ी जी कर रही थीं, उन्हȗने यहां 
पर जो कहा था, उसको मȅ क्वोट करता हूँ।  उन्हȗने कहा था - "मȅ यह ÎपÍट रूप  से कहता हूँ िक 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी कायर्कारी सǄा क े अत्याचार क े बीज बो रहे हȅ और संिवधान की सवȘच्चता क े साथ 
िखलवाड़ कर रहे हȅ, तािक पाटीर् क े लाभ को Ģाथिमकता दी जा सके ।  वह एक खराब िमसाल 
Îथािपत कर रहे हȅ और यह भारतीय लोकतंतर् क े िलए खतरनाक रुझान  है।"  यह कामेÌवर िंसह 
जी ने कहा था, जो दरभंगा से कांिÎटटु एंट असȂबली क े मेÇबर थे।  
 मैडम, जैसा मȅने कहा िक वैशाली मȂ लोकतंतर् की नींव पड़ी।  उसी तरह, जब इमरजȂसी 
आया, तो िबहार की उसी धरती से जय Ģकाश जी ने "संपूणर् कर्ांित" की आवाज उठाई।  हमारे 
नेता, नीतीश क ुमार जी उस समय 19 महीने जेल मȂ रहे।  तब वहां बाबा नागाजुर्न थे और वहां पर 
सबसे बड़ा Îलोगन था - "िंसहासन खाली करो िक जनता आती है।"  उसी िबहार से इमरजȂसी क े 
िखलाफ यह Îलोगन था।  
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपातकाल मȂ जो पिरिÎथित पैदा हुई, उसे सब लोगȗ ने 
देखा है। मȅ एक-दो बात कहने क े बाद अब सीधे Ãवाइंट पर आता हूँ। उस समय िसफर् जिÎटस 
खन्ना ने एक िडसȂट िदया था, िजसको मȅ यहां क्वोट कर रहा हूँ। तब िनरेन डे अटॉनीर् जनरल थे।  
उन्हȗने उनसे पूछा िक क्या जो सबसे बड़ा अिधकार, जीने का अिधकार है, जो हमको िमलता है, 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
जो जीवन क े जीने का अिधकार है, जो सबसे बड़ा मौिलक अिधकार है, क्या वह भी इमरजȂसी मȂ 
खत्म हो गया?  तब अटॉनीर् जनरल ने कहा िक हाँ, सरकार को ऐसा करने से संिवधान नहीं रोक 
सकता है।  यानी, आपके  जीवन क े जीने का अिधकार भी उस इमरजȂसी मȂ छीन िलया गया।  
जिÎटस खन्ना ने उस समय उसकी िडटेल मȂ जो भी बातȂ कहीं, उनको मȅ यहां क्वोट नहीं कर 
सकता, क्यȗिक मेरे पास समय कम है, लेिकन मȅ यहाँ उनकी एक बात बताना चाहता हूँ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: His time is over. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा: आप िंचता मत कीिजए, हम समय ले लȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... उसी क े बाद आज 
चचार् हुई और इतने दंगȗ की िलÎट दी गई।  1989 मȂ जब वहां कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, तब 
भागलपुर मȂ एक सबसे बड़ा दंगा हुआ।  वह दंगा दो महीने तक चलता रहा और उसमȂ 1,000 लोग 
मारे गए।  उस समय सत्यȂदर् बाबू, जो कांगर्ेस क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, मȅ उनकी िकताब मȂ से यहां क्वोट 
कर रहा हूँ िक उसमȂ उन्हȗने क्या कहा था।  सत्यȂदर् नारायण िसन्हा उस समय मुख्य मंतर्ी थे।  
उन्हȗने "मेरी यादȂ, मेरी भूलȂ" नामक एक िकताब िलखी है, िजसमȂ सत्यȂदर् बाबू कहते हȅ िक मुख्य 
मंतर्ी क े पद से हटाए जाने क े बाद उन्हȗने राजीव गांधी जी को दंगे मȂ क ु छ कांगर्ेसी नेताओं की 
भूिमकाओं क े बारे मȂ सूिचत िकया, उनकी इंवॉÊवमȂट क े बारे मȂ सूिचत िकया, लेिकन उन्हȗने 
उनकी बात नहीं सुनी।  1989 का दंगा और वहां पर 15 साल  कांगर्ेस सरकार मȂ थी, लेिकन उन 
दंगा पीिड़तȗ को न्याय नहीं िमला।  वषर् 2005 मȂ जब वहां नीतीश क ुमार जी आए, तब उसके  बाद 
ही कमीशन बनाकर दोिषयȗ को पिनशमȂट दी गई।  इसी तरह, वहां पर 1984 राइट्स क े जो भी 
दंगा पीिड़त थे, उनमȂ से िकसी को भी 15 सालȗ तक न्याय नहीं िमला।  
 मȅ एक और बात की चचार् करना चाहता हूं। वषर् 2005 मȂ िबहार असेÇबली का चुनाव हुआ, 
उस समय राÍटर्पित शासन लगा िदया गया। आप लोगȗ को ध्यान होगा िक जब वहां पर राÍटर्पित 
शासन लगाया गया, उस समय क े जो Ģेिज़डȂट थे, वे रिशया मȂ थे। रात मȂ 12 बज े क ैिबनेट की 
मीिंटग बुलाई गई। सरकार बचाने क े िलए, इन्हȗने क्या-क्या िकया – रात मȂ 12 बजे क ैिबनेट की 
मीिंटग बुलाई, फ ैक्स से एपर्ूवल मंगाया गय
ा और जब कोटर् मȂ मैटर गया, तब कोटर् ने जो 
ऑÅज़वȃशन िदया, मȅ उसको क्वोट कर रहा हूं। कोटर् ने कहा, "During 21 years of the 
functioning of the Constituti on,  the President’s Rule ha s been imposed 24 times.  
The imposition of the President’s Rule in  Kerala on November 1, 1956 -- Dr. John 
Brittas; is he around? -- was continuation of  President’s Rule in Travancore, Cochin,  
imposed earlier on March 23, 1956.  ...(Interruptions)...The State of Kerala has been 
under President’s Rule five times and for the longest period, out of 17 States, not 
taking into account the PEPSU, which late r merged into Punjab, and excluding 
Himachal Pradesh, which has become a State only recently." ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Hon. Member, 
kindly conclude. ...(Interruptions)... 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
101

 
 
 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA :   "There have been eleven spells of President’s Rule.  
The kind of political instability in some of  the States that we have witnessed and 
the...(Interruptions)...and the politics of defection which has so much tarnished the 
political life of this country, were not, perh aps, envisaged in any measures at the time 
when the Constituent Assembly co nsidered the draft Constitution. 
...(Interruptions)...No Governor would, it can be sa fely asserted, want the State to 
be brought under the President’s Rule except in circumstances, which leave him with 
no alternative. ...(Time-bell rings)... What is important to remember is that recourse 
to Article 356 should be the last resort for a Governor to seek." ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  The next 
speaker, Shri Praful Patel...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA :  "A frequent ...(Interruptions)...of the Governor in this 
connection is that he sometimes act at the behest of the 
Government."...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Thank you.  The 
next speaker, Shri Praful Patel...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा: मȅ इसिलए चचार् कर रहा हूं िक ...(Ëयवधान)... एक कहावत है िक नया 
मुÊला ज्यादा Ãयाज खाता है। ये संिवधान को लेकर घूम रहे हȅ। इस
 के  अलावा मȅ यह कहना चाहता 
हूं। मȅ दो िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत करूं गा। ये जातीय जनगणना की कॉपी लेकर घूमते रहते हȅ। 
देश मȂ अके ला राज्य िबहार है, िजसने काÎट सȂसस िकया। मȅ इंिडया की मीिंटग मȂ था, जब मुÇबई 
मȂ नीतीश क ुमार जी ने कहा िक जातीय जनगणना को एजȂडा मȂ लाइए। जो टीएमसी की नेता हȅ, 
उनको लगता है िक 2029 मȂ यह इनकी वैतरणी पार कराएग ी। उन्हȗने िवरोध िकया, कांगर्ेस क े 
लोग चुप रहे, उन्हȗने उस पर क ु छ नहीं कहा। आज वे जातीय जनगणना का कागज़ लेकर घूम रहे 
हȅ। मȅ एक ही बात कहना चाहता हूं। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPE
RSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Hon. Member, 
kindly conclude. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा: लाÎट, एक िमनट का समय लूंगा। खरगे साहब बैठे हुए थे, िबहार क े अंदर 
पंचायत मȂ दिलतȗ को, िपछड़ȗ को कोई िरज़वȃशन नहीं था, जब एनडीए की सरकार आई, 
जेडीयू-बीजेपी की सरकार आई, तब जाकर वहां आरक्षण िदया गया।  
 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :   T h e  n e x t  
speaker, Shri Praful Patel...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा: अंत मȂ, मȅ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का धन्यवाद करता हूं िक 75 साल  क े बाद 
संिवधान को हमारी मैिथली भाषा मȂ छपवाया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल (महाराÍटर्): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ पहले एक ÎपÍटीकरण करना चाहत
ा  हूं।  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK ): Kindly continue.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL : Madam, why should this interru ption be counted in my time?  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK ): Hon. Member, Shri 
Praful Patel, kindly continue.   
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: उपसभाध्यक्ष  महोदया, इनके  Ëयवधान करने से मेरा समय जाएगा।  मȅ शुरू  मȂ ही 
इनको ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं िक  जो मुझे समय िमला है, उससे अिधक समय भारतीय जनता 
पाटीर्  क े allotted time मȂ से उन्हȗने मुझे Îवीकृ ित दी है। इसिलए इनको कोई आपिǄ नहीं होनी 
चािहए।…(Ëयवधान)… ऑल
रेडी पाटीर् की तरफ से Îवीकृ ित है।  दूसरी बात यह है िक अगर ये इस 
तरह से बोलȂगे, तो कांगर्ेस का समय पूरा हो गया है, तो उनके  दूसरे Îपीकर को भी मौका न िदया 
जाए।  उनका समय पूरा हो चुका है।   मेरा यही कहना है िक objection मत लीिजए। 
…(Ëयवध
ान)…    That is all.  …(Interruptions)… This interruption should not be counted 
in my time.  …(Interruptions)…  Madam, when I am not being allowed to speak, this 
cannot be counted in my time.  …(Interruptions)… मैडम, मȅ अपना समय इसमȂ िगनती नहीं 
होने दूंगा। दूसरा, भारतीय जनता पा
टीर् ने मुझे अपना समय िदया है, इसिलए इनको क ु छ आपिǄ 
नहीं होनी चािहए। अब मȅ शुरू  करना चाहता  हूं।…(Ëयवधान)…    
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव (पिÌचमी बंगाल) : आपके  िलए नहीं, संजय  झा  जी क े िलए point of order 
मांगा था।   
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: यह मुझे मालूम नहीं है।  I cannot hear what you are saying.
  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Madam, I have a point of order. …(Interruptions)… 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
103

 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal) : Madam, please hear the point of order first.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Madam, please allow the point of order.   …(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK) : Hon. Member, 
Praful Patel ji, kindly continue.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL: Madam, please bring the House to order.  Otherwise, how can 
I speak?  …(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK) : Kindly continue.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: What is this, Madam?  …(Interruptions)… Madam, please listen 
to us.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK) : Kindly take your 
seats.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, kindly take your seats.  …(Interruptions)…  
Now, I request Shri Praful Patel to please continue. 
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हमारे भारत क े संिवधान की 75वीं  वषर्गांठ पर आज इस 
सदन मȂ चचार् हो रही है।…(Ëयवधान)…   हमारे देश क े संिवध
 ान पर हमȂ गवर् होना चािहए िक क ेवल 
हमारे देश का ही यह ǛेÍठ संिवधान नहीं है, लेिकन िवÌव क े जो बहुत सारे लोकतांितर्क देश हȅ, 
उनके  संिवधान की तुलन ा  मȂ हमारा संिवधान ǛेÍठ ही नहीं, बिÊक सवर्ǛेÍठ भी है।  मȅ इसका एक 
छोटा-सा उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं। …(Ëयवधान)…     अमरीका मȂ, जहां वे democracy क े रक्षक 
माने जाते हȅ, वे िवÌव मȂ अपना Ģचार-Ģसार करते हȅ िक अगर democracy देखन ी है, तो 
अमरीका मȂ देिखए।  मȅ आपको और सदन को इतना ही कहना चाहता हूं िक हमारा संिवधान ǛेÍठ 
से सवर्ǛेÍठ क्यȗ है? …(Ëयवधान)…   मैडम, अमरीका मȂ काली चमड़ी क े लोग, िजनको ‘Åलैक्स’ 
कहा जाता है, उनकी मिहलाओं को वोिंटग का अिधकार, हमारे 1950 मȂ संिवधान मȂ अिधकार 
िमलने क े कई वषș क े बाद …(Ëयवधा
न)…  Madam, I cannot speak like this.   You have to 
bring the House to order.  Why should I be wasting my time?   …(Interruptions)… You 
have to bring the House to order.  Otherwise, I cannot speak. 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK) : I request the hon. 
Member to kindly stop for some time.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, kindly take 
your seats.  …(Interruptions)…  
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala):  Madam, please hear my point of order.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI PHANGNON KONYAK) : Under which rule?  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN : Madam, my point of order is under Rule 236 and Rule 238.  
…(Interruptions)… Rule 236 clearly says, "When a me mber rises to speak, his name 
shall be called by the Chairman.  If more members than one rise at the same time, the 
member whose name is so called shall be entitled to speak." 
 That means, his time is over.  You had given chance to a person, but again the 
person has spoken here.  That is against the rule.  I am rais ing the second point 
which is on Rule 238 – Rules to be observ ed.  A part of Rule 238 is also reflected 
here.  So, these two rules, Rule 236 and Ru le 238, are applicable here.  Madam, you 
have given extra time to the person, after he is entitled to speak.   This is injustice .  
Secondly, you should give proper time to  every Member, not only the ruling party 
Members.  So, my humble request is, this is  the discussion on Co nstitution.  Values 
of the Constitution should be protected.  We  all are standing here for the discussion 
on the Constitution.  The framers of ou r Constitution have raised a lot of 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Thank you, very 
much.  If anything is amiss, it will be brought to the notice of the Chairman.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:   We should raise the spirit of the Constitution inside the House 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Thank you, very 
much.  If anything is amiss, it will be brought to the notice of the Chairman.  
...(Interruptions)...Now, Shri Praful Patel.   
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL:  Madam, first and foremost, I have not even started and three 
minutes have gone in all this. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
105

 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  N o  p o i n t  o f  
order, since one party has given all its time.  ...(Interruptions)...No point of order, 
since one party has given its entire time.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL :  Your clock must start again.  ...(Interruptions)...I have not 
spoken at all and three minutes have gone, and you will ask me to stop.  You will have 
to reset the clock. 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): Yes, yes. 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL :  Madam, Vice-Chairman, we ar e discussing the Glorious 75 
years of our Constitution.  But we are reducing this debate to a ‘ तू-तू, मȅ-मȅ’, which I 
am sorry about. I apologize to you for sa ying so.  But please, let us maintain 
decorum.  I was trying to make a point that  we are a great democracy.  Thanks to the 
Constitution framed by the founding fathers of our Consti tution led by Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar and his team, it ha s endured democracy in India for the last more than 75 
years.  Even a country like the United St ates, which preaches us about democracy, 
got their right to vote for the black women an d the people of black colour only around 
the mid 60s when Dr. Martin Luther King an d many of his colleagues started a huge 
movement there which led to a change in their Constitution and voting rights were 
given to the people of black colour.  I am just trying to say that many a country has 
been democratic and their Constitutions ha ve been changed from time to time, but 
our Constitution, which was given to us by our founding fathers, led by Dr. 
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar, has really changed the entire landscape of our 
country. 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
महोदय, हज़ारȗ साल पुरानी हमारी जो सामािजक और आिर्थक ËयवÎथा थी, उस सारी ËयवÎथा 
को बदलने क े िलए हमȂ जो संिव
 धान िमला है, उसकी वजह से आज भारत मȂ हर Ëयिƪ खुली हवा 
मȂ अपने अिधकारȗ क े साथ जी रहा है और इसी वजह से हम लोगȗ को सÇमान िमला है।  
महोदय, हमारे िवपक्ष क े नेता ने भी हमारे देश की बहुत सारी बातȂ कहीं। उन्हȗने मनुÎमृित िदखाई, 
बहुत सारी चीज़Ȃ िदखाईं। हमारे देश मȂ हज़ारȗ साल पुरानी ËयवÎथाएँ थीं, इससे कोई िडनाई नहीं 
करता, लेिक
न हमȂ देश को आगे ले जाकर बदलना है। हज़ारȗ साल पुरानी जो बातȂ थीं, उनको 
दोहराने से हमारा देश नहीं बदलने वाला है, हमारा देश ऑलरेडी उससे आगे बढ़ चुका है। बार-
बार वही बातȂ कहना िक हमने यह िकया, हमने वह िकया, हमने देश को आज़ादी िदलाई आिद-
आिद, इससे कोई लाभ नहीं होगा। महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक देश को आज़ादी क ु छ चंद 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
नेताओं ने नहीं िदलाई, बिÊक इस देश क े आम लोगȗ, सुखदेव, भगत िंसह और िबरसा मुंडा जैसे 
लोगȗ ने िदलाई।  
 आप कहते हȅ िक क ेवल हम ने आजादी िदलाई है! हम भी आपके  साथ थे। हम इस बात क े 
िलए इनकार नहीं करते हȅ। उस आज
ादी की लड़ाई मȂ हमारे िपताजी भी थे। हमȂ काँगर्ेस पाटीर् की 
बात नहीं करनी है। काँगर्ेस पाटीर् तो आजादी क े बाद बनी। आजादी क े समय की काँगर्ेस कोई 
पोलीिटकल पाटीर् नहीं थी, बिÊक वह ģीडम मूवमȂट थी। बार-बार यह कहना िक हमने आजादी 
िदलाई, तो बाकी सब लोगȗ ने क्या भज
न िकया? इस देश क े आम आदमी ने हमȂ आजादी िदलाई। 
अगर वे नहीं जुड़ते, तो आजादी िमलने वाली नहीं थी। अगर आज 75 वषș क े बाद भी हम खुले 
भारत मȂ जी रहे हȅ, आजाद भारत मȂ जी रहे हȅ, इतनी डाइविर्सटी क े बावजूद, कहाँ पूवȘǄर है, 
कहाँ दिक्षण भारत है, कहाँ कÌमीर है, इस सारे मुÊक को एक रखने मȂ क ेवल और क ेवल हमारे 
भारत क े संिवधान की शि
ƪ है। मȅ आप लोगȗ से यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जो हमारा 75 वषș का 
शानदार Ģवास रहा है, हम हÊकी बात करके , उसे छोटा न करȂ, छोटा न िदखाएं। हमारे अगल-
बगल क े मुÊक
ȗ मȂ देिखए, उन्हȗने भी हमारे साथ आजादी पाई थी। इसके  बाद उन्हȗने भी संिवधान 
बनाया, लेिकन क्या उनका संिवधान िटक पाया, वहाँ लोकतांितर्क ËयवÎथाएं िटक पाईं? कहीं 
िमिलटर्ी रूल  आया, कहीं क ू हो गया हो, कहीं कोई और बातȂ बनीं। हमारे संिवधान को डा. बाबा 
साहेब अÇबेडकर और उनकी टीम ने उस टाइम पर ģ े म िकया। यह कोई एक रात मȂ नहीं बना है। 
इसे लेकर बहुत मंथन हुआ, अलग-अलग वƪाओं ने बातȂ कहीं, इसिलए मȅ उन्हȂ दोहराना नहीं 
चाहूँगा, लेिकन इस  काँÎटीǷूशन असेÇबली मȂ और उसके  साथ-साथ जो बहस हुई, उसमȂ बहुत 
लोगȗ का योगदान रहा है। इसमȂ Ģमुख योगदान डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडक
र का रहा है, इसे को ई  
इनकार नहीं कर सकता है।  
चूँिक आप लोगȗ ने राजनीितक बात कही, इसिलए मȅ भी कहूँगा। अगर लोकतंतर् क े इस 
Ģवास मȂ कोई सबसे बड़ा धÅबा लगा था, तो 1975 से 1977 मȂ लगा था। इस देश मȂ इमरजȂसी लगी 
थी। हम लोग उस टाइम मȂ कॉलेज मȂ पढ़ते थे। हमȂ याद है िक िकस-िकस तरह से लोगȗ को उनके  
मूल अिधकारȗ से वंिच
त रखा गया था। सर, लोग खेतȗ मȂ भागते थे, पेड़ȗ पर जाकर छ ुपते थे, 
क्यȗिक नसबंदी हो जा
एगी। लोगȗ को पकड़-पकड़ कर जेलȗ मȂ डाला जाता था। यह सब हम लोगȗ 
ने अपनी आँखȗ से देखा हुआ है। हम कोई नई बात कर रहे हȅ, ऐसी बात नहीं है। आज हम इतनी 
बात कर रहे हȅ, तो इन लोगȗ की तरफ से ऐसी कौन-सी बात आई, जो हमारी आजादी, हमारी 
लोकतांितर्क ËयवÎथा को सक्षम करने क े िलए रही? मȅ आपक
ो यह भी बताना चाहूँगा िक अभी 
हमारे देश मȂ यह बहुत चचार् चल रही है, इनके  ही नेता बोलते हȅ िक िजसकी िजतनी आबादी, 
उसकी उतनी िहÎसेदारी। ...(Ëयवधान).
.. हाँ, भागीदारी या िहÎसेदारी, जो भी बोलते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... जो भी आपने कहा, वह सही है। अब आप बताइए। अब काÎट सȂसेस की बात करते 
हȅ। एससी-एसटी िरज
वȃशन हमारे ओिरिजनल काँÎटीǷूशन का िहÎसा है। इसके  बाद हमारे देश 
की सामािजक ËयवÎथा को देखकर मंडल आयोग का गठन हुआ था। जब मंडल आयोग बना और 
उसकी िसफािरशȂ आईं, उन्हȂ िकसने Îवीकार िक या ? मंडल आयोग की िसफािरशȂ हमारी सरकार 
क े पटल पर कब पड़ी थीं? उस वƪ काँगर्ेस की सरकार थी, राजीव गाँधी जी की सरकार थी। जब 
िवÌवनाथ Ģताप िंसह जी हमारे देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, तब... ...(Ëयवधान)... ठीक है, जो भी है, 
यह इितहास की बात है। िवÌवनाथ Ģत
ाप िंसह जी क े टाइम पर ही मंडल आयोग की िसफािरशȗ 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
107

 
 
को Îवीकार करने का काम हुआ। मान्यवर, मȅ आपको ही देख रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक आप भी उस 
सरकार मȂ थे, इसिलए मȅ आपको सदन की ओर से और मेरी ओर से बधाई देता हूँ िक आपने मंडल 
आयोग की िसफािरशȗ को Îव ीकार  करने का काम िकया। 
 आज इस देश मȂ जो इतनी बड़ी बातȂ करते हȅ, काÎट सȂसस की बात करते हȅ, संिवधान की 
िकताब को लेकर घूमते हȅ, उनको यह मालूम होना चािहए िक इन बाकी जनजाितयȗ को अिधकार 
देने का काम िकस वƪ हुआ और िक
सने िकया था।  उसमȂ इनका कोई योगदान नहीं है।   
सर, इन्हȗने धारा 370 का िवरोध िकया, वोट नहीं डाला और बाहर चले गए।  साहब, आप तो खुद 
एक कांिÎटǷूशनल एक्सपटर् हȅ, एक बड़े अिधवƪा रहे हȅ, मुझे आपको इसके  बारे मȂ जानकारी 
देने की जरूरत नहीं है।  हमारे कािन्Î
टǷूशन  मȂ धारा 370 एक  टȂपरेरी Ģोिवजन था।  अगर हम 
डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर क े कांिÎटǷूशन को गीता, क ुरान, बाइबल, गुरु  गर्ंथ सािहब या जो भी 
हम मानते हȅ, िजसको आप लेकर घूमते हȅ, उस
मȂ हमȂ यह भी देखना और पढ़ना चािहए था िक 
बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने जो संिवधान डर्ाÄट िकया था, उसमȂ वह टȂपरेरी Ģोिवजन था। टȂपरेरी 
Ģोिवजन का मतलब - जब वह िहÎसा हमारे देश मȂ जुड़ा, तो उस िहÎसे को जोड़ते वƪ उनको 
क ु छ वƪ देना चािहए और वहां की िव
शेष पिरिÎथितयȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखना चािहए।  इस वजह से it 
was inserted as a temporary clause and when  it was removed by none other than this 
strong Government िक हमको धारा 370 को  हटाना है, इतने वषș क े बाद वहां की पिरिÎथित 
बदली है, उसका िमसयूज़ हो रहा है, तब हमारे िमतर्ȗ ने इसमȂ साथ न देते हुए एक अल
ग भूिमका 
अदा की और दूसरी ओर आप संिवधान और बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर की बात करते हो! उनका 
सÇमान करने का काम, उनकी इच्छा
ओं को सÇमान करने का काम इस बाजू से हुआ है, उस बाजू 
से नहीं हुआ है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... िदिग्वजय भाई, आप एससी, एसटी की बात करते हो।   आप तो 
मध्य Ģदेश मȂ बहुत घूमे हȅ और आपने बहुत पदयातर्ाएं की हȅ।  मȅ आपको कहना चाहता हूं िक 
एससी, एसटी का Ģावधान कÌमीर मȂ नहीं था। वहां क े संिव
धान मȂ एससी, एसटी को कोई भी 
िरयायत नहीं िमलती थी।  आज हमारे भारत का संिवधान कÌमीर से कन्याकु मारी तक लागू हुआ 
है और एससी, एसटी को न्याय देने का काम हुआ है।  इस बात को भी हमȂ Î
वीकार करना होगा।   
सर, मȅ एक और Ģोिवजन की बात करूं गा, जो िक धारा 356 है।  धारा 356 का  बार-बार गलत 
इÎतेमाल कर
ने का काम िपछली सरकारȗ ने िकया है।  अभी मेरे नेता पवार साहब यहां नहीं बैठे हȅ, 
मȅ एक उदाहरण यहां देना चाहूंगा। मुझे याद है िक इमरजȂसी क े बाद जब चुनाव हुए और 1978 मȂ 
जब वे खुद मुख्य मंतर्ी बने, उसके  बाद 1980 मȂ देश मȂ िफर लोक सभा क े चुनाव क े बाद इंिदरा जी 
का शा
सन आया।  यह पवार साहब ǎारा कही गई बात है, मȅ पुिÍट कर सकता हूं, लेिकन आज वे 
यहां बैठे नहीं हȅ।  िदिग्वज
य भाई, आप उनके  िमतर् हȅ, इसिलए आप पूछ सकते हȅ िक उनको सुबह 
फोन आया िक क्या आप हमारे साथ आ रहे हो? …( Ëयवधान)...  
ऑथȂिटके ट क्या है, मȅ अभी ऑथȂिटके ट करके  बताता हूं।  …( Ëयवधान)... यह धारा 356 की बात 
हो रही है।  जब शरद पवार जी ने कहा िक मȅ आपके  साथ आने को तैयार नहीं हूं, तो महाराÍटर् मȂ 
immediately धारा 356 लागू हुई। …( Ëयवधान)..
.  िकरण जी, आपके  राज्य मȂ भजन लाल जी 
पूरी पाटीर् और सरकार लेकर इधर आए, तो वहां 356 की धारा लागू नहीं की गई।  यह सच्
चाई है 
और अगर इसको ऑथȂिटके ट करना होगा, तो यह आपको िरकॉडर् मȂ ही िमल जाएगा।   इसिलए मȅ 
आपको कहना चाहता हूं िक नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की इस सरकार क े आने क े बाद धारा 356 करीब -
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
करीब इितहास बन चुकी है और अब तक इसका इÎतेमाल नहीं िकया गया है।  आज जो संिवधान 
की बात करते हȅ, िकताब लेकर घूमने की बात करते हȅ, उनको यह बात समझनी चािहए िक नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी की इस सरकार ने धारा 356 का कभी दुरुपयोग  नहीं िकया है, लेिकन आप इन सब बातȗ 
को नहीं सम
झȂगे।  देश आगे बढ़ रहा है, हम िवकिसत भारत की बात करते हȅ, आज नए भारत की 
बात करते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... आप वही िघसी-िपटी टेप बजाते रहते हो, पुरानी बातȂ करते रहते 
हो।  आज नए भारत क े नए नौजवानȗ की उमंग और उत्साह क्या है, उनकी अपेक्षा क्या है, आप 
उसकी पूिर्त की बात कि
रए और भारत को आगे बढ़ाने की बात कीिजए।    
 इस संिवधान की चचार् को छोटी राजनीितक लड़ाइयȗ मȂ मत बांट दीिजए। यही काम उधर 
क े िपछले कई वƪाओं क े भाषणȗ मȂ हमने देखा है।  सर, लोक सभा की भी िडबेट देिखए। लोक 
सभा की िडबेट मȂ भी, मुझे भी लगा िक नया नेतृत्व आया है, तो नया नेतृत्व क ु छ नई िदशा 
िदखाएगा, लेिकन वही पुरानी बातȂ आ गईं, वही पुरानी टेपȂ बजने लगीं, वही संिव
धान की िकताबȂ 
िदखाई गईं, िजसके  अंदर कोरे पन्ने हȅ। ऐसे हम लोगȗ को ज्ञान की बातȂ िदखाई गईं। इसिलए मȅ 
ज्यादा क ु छ नहीं कहूंगा, िजतना मुझे वƪ िमला, उस वƪ क े आधार पर ही मȅ बोल रहा हूं। मȅ 
इनका समय लेकर ही परिमशन क े साथ बोल रहा हूं। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Seven minutes extra have been given to you.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल:  सर, मेरी आपसे गुजािरश है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   P
r a f u lji, one minute.  Seven minutes extra time was allocated to 
you by the ruling party.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL:  Yes, Sir.  …(Interruptions)…  It has been given to me by them.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल : सर, रूिंलग  पाटीर् इनको क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी बनाए, समय से क्यȗ राजी कर रहे 
हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It is a good suggestion.  …(Interruptions)…  I t  i s  a  v e r y  g o o d  
suggestion.  …(Interruptions)…     
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: सर, यहां मिहला आरक्षण की बात हो रही थी। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: वे भी तो बात ठीक कह रहे हȅ, उनकी भी सुन लीिजए जरा। चिलए, continue. 
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: सर, मिहला आरक्षण की बात यह
ां पर बड़े जोरȗ से हो रही थी। अब यह संिवध ान 
का िहÎसा है, इसिलए मȅ कह रहा हूं। मȅ संिवधान क े बाहर की बात, इधर-उधर की बात नहीं कर 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
109

 
 
रहा हूं। मȅ भी सरकार मȂ मंतर्ी था, हमने भी बहुत साल देखा, बार-बार मिहला आरक्षण की बात 
होती थी, क ैिबनेट मȂ पास होता था, पेश िकया जाता था, लेिकन कभी पास करने की मंशा क े साथ 
Women’s Reservation Bill नहीं लाया गया। हमेशा कहीं न कहीं िकसी पाटीर् की आड़ लेकर इस 
मिहला आरक्षण िबल क े ǎारा क ेवल आंखȗ मȂ धूल झȗकने का काम होता रहा। यह बात सच्चाई है, 
मȅ यह बोल रहा हूं, इसिलए नहीं है। मोदी जी ने, एनडी ए  ने, 2014 क े बीजेपी क े मेिनफे Îटो मȂ इसे 
डाला, 2019 क े मेिनफे Îटो मȂ डाला और आज उसको िसǉ करने क े बाद, उसको मंजूर करने क े 
बाद अगली 2029 की  लोक सभा और िवधान सभाओं क े चुनावȗ मȂ मिहलाओं को 33 Ģितशत 
आरक्षण िमलने वाला है। इसिलए नीयत और नीित मȂ िकतना फकर् है! सर, हमने देखा है, अन्यथा 
मȅ नहीं बोलता, लेिकन हमने देखा है। हमारे पुराने साथी इससे इनकार नह
ीं कर सकते, हम साथ 
मȂ बैठते थे, मुझे उनके  Ģित सÇमान है, मगर मȅ इतना जरूर  कहूंगा िक ये जो सारी चीजȂ हȅ, एक 
हारा हुआ Ëयिƪ क ै से बौखलाता है, वैसे इस तरह की बौखलाहट हमारे सामने यहां रखने की 
कोिशश की जाती है, देश क े लोगȗ को िदशा से भटकाने की बात की जा ती है। लोक सभा क े 
चुनाव मȂ लोगȗ को िदशा से भटकाने मȂ क ु छ हद तक वे सफल रहे, लेिकन अभी हिरयाणा और 
महाराÍटर् मȂ चुनाव हुए और आपने देखा िक हिरयाणा और महाराÍटर् मȂ दूध का दूध और पानी का 
पानी हो गया। ...(Ëयव
धान)... िबÊकु ल हो गया। जयराम जी, जयराम जी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 मान्यवर, मेरा इतना ही िनवेदन है िक हम लोगȗ ने यहां बहुत सारी चीजȗ पर बहस की है, 
मेरी सभी से गुजािरश है िक हम अपने 75 साल क े glorious tradition क े बारे मȂ बात करȂ, हमारी 
आजादी की लड़ाई का glorious past है, इि
तहास है, उसकी बात करȂ, sacrifices की बात करȂ।  
हमारे जो शमर्नाक चैÃटसर् हȅ, बार-बार उनकी बात करने की जरूरत नहीं है। हजा रȗ साल से 
हमारे देश की सामािजक ËयवÎथा है, आिर्थक ËयवÎथा है, जो क ु छ अलग तौर-तरीके  से बनी हुई 
थी, लेिकन आज का जमाना, आज की बीजेपी, आज का एन डीए , आज का नेतृत्व इस देश को 
कहां ले जा रहा है! हमारे देश की आंतिरक से लेकर आिर्थक Ģगित, िजस बड़ी फौलादी क े साथ 
हो रही है, हम िवÌव की तीसरी बड़ी आिर्थक शिƪ मȂ पिरविर्तत होने जा रहे हȅ। इसिलए आज 
हमको अपने देश का गौरव कर
ने का वƪ आया है और एक गौरवशाली Ģधान मंतर्ी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
देश और आगे बढ़ता जाएगा।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                                             
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri S Niranjan Reddy; seven minutes. 
 
SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Hon. Chairman, Sir, as I rise to speak 
on 75 years of Glorious Working of Constitu tion of India, I understand I am too small 
to speak on such an important document and the working of over a large period of 75 
years. I would like to take the positive feedback from the di scussion that has 
happened. While I have seen sides, trade allegations against each other, what was 
discernible was everybody is committed to maintaining the constitutional ethos and 
abiding by the Constitution. I find, unanimously, the enti re House believes that the 
Constitution needs to be followed.  So, that is the largest take-away from this 
particular d
iscussion. We ha ve travelled far from the doomsday's predictions as was 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
mentioned by the hon. Leader of Opposi tion and by Shri Ha rdeep Singh Puri. I 
completely second them that we have now defied not only these doomsday's 
predictions, but we have turned out to be one of the most vibrant democracies.  I 
think, the time has now come and a necessi ty has arisen that we have to look 
forward. I would like to touch upon three points given the short time I have.  First, I 
represent the Council of States.  I think, going  forward, Sir, I would believe that this 
House would have to actively look at the in terests of the State because that is the 
purpose for which the Second Chamber wa s created as the Rajya Sabha as the 
Council of States.  One area of concern for the State that I represent, that I come 
from, is the impending delimitation that is pr oposed in terms of Articles 81 and 82.  I 
would beseech the House that the States that  have done well, as and when we reach 
that stage of considering delimitation of constituencies, I would expect that this 
House would support the cause of the States that have done well, that have aided in 
the growth of the country's economy that the delimitation exercise will take care of 
our concerns.  
 I would like the House to spare a thought for a moment for the huge work 
done by the hon. Supreme Court and the Hi gh Courts of the country. We have about 
35 to 40 Supreme Court Judges for a population of 140 crores. This roughly translates 
to 3.5 crore to 4 crore people for each Su preme Court Judge. The amount of work 
they do is almost unbelievable. I think,  the House may have to acknowledge the 
yeoman service rendered by the Judiciar y in general and the Supreme Court in 
particular. I have one concern in respect of th e High Courts.  I find that over a period 
of time, with increasing tribunalisation, with  28 Acts having appeals directly to the 
Supreme Court, the High Court, as it st arted in 1950 when the Constitution was 
framed, does not appear to be as high anymore.  Several of important legislations 
bypass the High Courts. They go to the tr ibunals and go to the Supreme Court.  I 
would request the House to consider bringi ng High Court back to its position of 
eminence.  
One other area of concern that I have, and I want this House to consider 
moving forward in the next 25 years or the next 75 years, is the issue relating to 
electoral reforms. The Constitution makes ba sic provisions in relation to elections, 
and leaves it to the wisdom of the Parlia ment to make laws. So, we have made the 
Representation of the People Act of 1950 and the Representa tion of the People Act of 
1951. But, Sir, both these enactments may n eed certain relook in terms of electoral 
reforms.  It is because elections are becoming increasingly costly, someone like me, 
while I am a successful professional, I don' t think I would be able to contest a Lok 
Sabha election or even a member of Legislative Assembly election from the State I 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
111

 
 
represent or the neighboring States because  elections have become too expensive. I 
think, all of us need to work towards bringi ng up some law. The Co nstitution left that 
responsibility to the Parliament. It is we, as  a Parliament, need to rise up. We need to 
relook at that 1950 & 1951 Acts to make some important legislative reforms in election 
laws to ensure that the best people represent the legislative Houses and the 
parliamentary House.   
One other area of concern we need to look  at actively is health and education. 
Earlier, while India has progressed so much , it has now become a poverty-enabler. 
What is happening is, parents, while striving to give good education, and also trying 
to provide good health for their families are sp ending so much of their money.  So, as 
a result, a large percentage of population is  getting pushed into poverty, while there 
has been a huge poverty alleviation. 
5.00 P.M. 
The Government has done exceedingly well . I would compliment all the Governments 
that we have brought down poverty to a great level. But poverty still continues. One of 
the poverty enabling factors is health and education. Sir, we have made giant strides 
in both health and education, but most of it, unfortunately, has been in private sector. 
I think, moving forward, we may have to l ook at doing something for making it more 
accessible.  
One new area of concern that has been increasing is growing income inequality 
and economic inequality. These are the times which are resulting in this situation. This 
is a global phenomenon. I think there is a large responsibility on the Parliament that 
we do something to ensure that this in come inequality, economic inequality do not 
become the reason for the modern depressed and weaker sections of the future. Sir, 
we are coming over historical injustices th at have resulted. The Constitution provides 
for remedial measures, but I think, while we  are addressing that remedy, we have not 
succeeded fully. The very fa ct that we have not been able to do away with affirmative 
action, is an acknowledgement that we have not achieved that object. It is salutary, it 
needs to continue, but we need to be mind ful that we would not want a new class of 
depressed people, a new class of weaker sections to aris e because of this income 
inequality. We are getting rid of the past in justices.  We cannot allow future injustices 
to come. Sir, I am grateful for granting me  this opportunity and I thank the House for 
enabling me to speak. Thank you very much.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari. 
 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद 
देना चाहता हूँ िक आज क े इस अवसर पर, जो एक ऐितहािसक अवसर है, आपने मुझे बोलने का 
अवसर िदया। िजस Ģकार से हम संिवधान सभा क े माननीय सदÎयȗ को आदर देकर, उनका 
वंदन करके  आज उसका पाठ कर रहे हȅ, मȅ समझता हूँ िक आपकी सदा
रत मȂ इस सदन मȂ जो 
बहस होगी, वह भी आने वाले समय मȂ भारत को 2047 तक िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने क े संकÊप क े 
साथ पूरी होगी।  इसी क े साथ मȅ इस बहस की शुरुआत  करना चाहता हूँ।  
माननीय सभ
ापित महोदय, जब इसका िवषय गौरवशाली यातर्ा रखा गया, तब गौरवशाली 
यातर्ा मȂ हम उन सब क्षणȗ को लȂगे, िजन क्षणȗ ने हमारे राÍटर् को यहाँ तक पहुंचाया।  हम उन सभी 
लोगȗ क े Ģित क ृतज्ञ हȅ, उन सभी लोगȗ क े िलए वंदन करȂगे, अिभनंदन करȂगे, िजन्हȗने संिवधान 
सभा मȂ इत
नी बड़ी समÎयाओं क े साथ, इतना बड़ा संिवधान बनाकर भारत को इस Îथान पर 
लाकर पहुँचाया।  उसके  िलए 284 सदÎय, िजन्हȗने उस िदन हÎताक्षर िकए थे, वे सभी वंदन और 
अिभनंदन क े पातर् हȅ, इसिलए मȅ उनको नमन करता हूँ।  
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, संिवधान का िनयम साफ है ‘ सम’ और ‘ िव
धान’। इसमȂ दो 
शÅद हȅ - सम और िव धान।   हमȂ उस पर चचार् करनी चािहए थी, लेिकन मुझे आज तकलीफ हुई, 
जब हमारे Ģितपक्ष क े नेता माननीय खरगे जी ने खड़े होकर दो िकताबȂ हाथ मȂ लीं।  उन्हȗने 
मनुÎमृित और संिवधान हाथ मȂ िलया।  माननीय सभापित महोदय, भारत मȂ िवधान िलखने की 
बहुत पुरानी परंपरा है और मनुÎमृित आज से 5,000 साल पहले िलखी गई थी और उसके  बाद 52 
Îमृितयां और िलखी गई हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 100 साल बाद हर Îमृित को बदल िदया जाता था।  
आज से 4,800 वषर् पहले जो कानून बदल गया, आज वे उस कानून को लेकर खड़े हȅ।  आप 
उसको मान रहे हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... मनुÎमृित कोई धािर्मक गर्ंथ नहीं है, मनुÎमृित कोई शाÎतर् भी 
नहीं है।  हमारे यहाँ 52 Îमृितयाँ िलखी गईं।  अगर आज वे खड़े होकर यह पूछ लेते िक याज्ञवÊक् य 
Îमृित क े बारे मȂ आपका क्या िवचार है, तो यह Ģासांिगक होता, क्यȗिक आज क े िदन िमताक्षरा 
और दायभाग याज्ञवÊक्य Îमृित क े िहसाब से है।  वे खड़े होकर यह पूछ लेते िक आप इस 
याज्ञवÊक्
य Îमृित पर ही काम चलाएँगे या शरीयत क े आधार पर चलाएँगे या संिवधान क े आधार 
पर चलाएँगे, तब इस बात का जवाब िदया जा सकता था।  मȅ समझता हूँ िक सबसे पहले उनको 
यह समझ लेना चा
िहए। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मनुÎमृित 4,800 वष र् पहले िलखी गई और उसका घनÌयाम 
ितवाड़ी या भारतीय जनता पाटीर् से क्या लेना-देना है, जबिक वह हमारा धािर्मक गर्ंथ भी नहीं है, 
वह कोई शाÎतर् भी नहीं है, लेिकन बार-बार मनुÎमृित-मनुÎमृित िकया जाता है।  मȅ दूसरी बात यह 
कहना चाहूंगा िक मनुÎमृित का तो आपने िजकर् कर िदया, लेिकन नारद, पाराशर और विश
Íठ 
जैसी 52 Îमृितयां िलखी गईं और अंत मȂ याज्ञव Êक्य  Îमृित िलखी गई।  उनकी चचार् अब करने की 
क्या आवÌयकता है?  अब  एक दूसरी चचार् अंगूठा काटने की हो रही है।  िकसने अंगूठा काट 
िलया?  हमारे पास ही  गुरुगर्ाम है।  महाभारत काल मȂ दर्ोणाचायर् हुए, िजनका िशÍय एकलËय था ।   
उस घटना क े कारण एकलËय महान हो गया और आज भारत सरकार ने एकलËय क े नाम से 
सैकड़ȗ Îकू Êस खोल िदए।  आप एकलËय का भी अपमान कर रहे हȅ, दर्ोणाचायर् का भी अपमान कर 
रहे हȅ।  आप मनुÎमृित का एक वाक्य तो याद कर लो!  हाँ, हम ने मनुÎमृित का एक वाक्य याद 
रखा है िक "यतर् नायर्Îतु पूज्यन्ते, रमन्ते ततर् देवता" और इसिलए हम यहां पर पहला कानून नारी 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
113

 
 
शिƪ वंदन का लाये।  हमने मनुÎमृित का क ेवल इतना-सा िहÎसा ही माना और दूसरा िहÎसा नहीं 
माना।   
सभापित महोदय, मȅ अब यह कहना चाहूँगा िक संिवधान मȂ िलखा गया है - We the 
people of India, यानी  हम भारत क े लोग।  िजस समय 'लोक' आ गया, उसी समय हम Îवतंतर् 
हो गए, हम नागिरक हो गए।  संिवधान िनमार्ताओं को सबसे पहले इस बात क े िलए धन्यवाद है िक 
उन्हȗने हमको नाग
िरक बना िदया।  हम पहले Ģजा थे। सभापित महोदय, आप तो सब जानते हȅ, 
Ģजा सÅजेक्ट होता है।  राजा होता है, Ģजा होती है।  हम लोक हȅ, हम गण हȅ और हम नागिरक हȅ, 
यह अिधकार हमको 'We the people of India, हम भारत क े लोग' ने िदया।  संिवधान िनमार्त
ाओं 
ने यह सबसे बड़ा काम िकया िक उन्हȗने हमको नागिरक बना िदया।  नागिरक बनने क े बाद 
हमको िजतने अिधकार िदए गए, िजतने कतर्Ëय िदए गए, वे सारे आपके  सामने हȅ।  कांगर्ेस क े सभी 
माननीय सदÎय इस बात को सुनȂ िक जब यह संिवधान Îव
ीकार िकया गया, तब आिखरी िदन उस 
पर सभी क े दÎतखत हो रहे थे।  तब टी.टी. क ृÍणमाचारी जी, जो िक कांगर्ेस क े ही थे, उन्हȗने वहां 
भाषण िदया।  उस समय डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े सात मȂबसर् थे, िजनमȂ से एक िवदेश चले गए थे, एक 
का देहांत हो गया था, दो बीमार थे और एक ही उपिÎथत थे।  तब अिधक ांश काम डा. भीमराव 
अÇबेडकर ने िकया, टी.टी. क ृÍणमाचारी जी ने वहां यह ÎटेटमȂट दी।  अगर हम आज इसको एक 
परंपरा िगनते हȅ िक भारत मȂ िलिखत संिवध ान  की परंपरा थी, तो िफर मनुÎमृित आपको अच्छी 
नहीं लगती, वह तो चली गई, िफर याज्ञवÊक्य Îमृित और अन्य Îमृितयां आईं, तो आज हम इस 
संिवधान को 'अÇबेडकर Îमृित' क े नाम से पुकार सकते हȅ।  यह हमारी Îमृित है, यह 'अÇबेडकर 
Îमृित' है।    
सभापित महोदय, उन्हȗने कहा िक इस संिवधान ने क्या िकया?  इस संिव
धान ने अÅदुल 
कलाम जी को यहां का राÍटर्पित बनाया, इस संिवधान ने अनुसूिचत जाित क े Ǜी रामनाथ कोिंवद 
जी को राÍटर्पित बनाया, इस संिवधान ने दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी को भारत का राÍटर्पित बनाया, इस 
संिवधान ने जगदीप धनखड़ जी को भारत का उ
पराÍटर्पित बनाया और इस संिवधान ने एक चाय 
बेचने वाले नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को भारत का Ģधान मंतर्ी बनाया, लेिकन ये सब बनाने क े िलए कांगर्ेस 
पाटीर् काम नहीं कर सक
ती, बिÊक इसके  िलए अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी और नरेन्दर् मोदी जैसा नेता 
चािहए, जो यह काम कर सके , यह इस संिवधान ने िकया।   
सभापित महोदय, संिवधान बनाते समय संिवध ान िनमार्ताओं क े मन मȂ एक टीस रह गई 
और वह टीस यह थी िक India, that is, Bharat.  उस वƪ इस नाम पर बहुत बड़ी बहस हुई।  
उस बहस मȂ कांगर्ेस क े Ģमुख नेता, क े.एम. मुंशी जी, एच.वी. कामथ जी, राव साहब, राजिर्ष 
टंडन जी और डा. एस.  राध
ाकृ Íणन जैसे बहुत से लोगȗ ने भाग िलया।  उन सब लोगȗ की एक राय 
थी िक भारत नाम होना चािहए। 
 India that is Bharat. उनको भारत नाम रखने क े पीछे जो तकर् िदए। मȅ अपने तकर् नहीं 
कह रहा हूं, मȅ उन्हीं क े तकर् बोल रहा हूं। उन्
हȗने कहा िक भारत का नाम लेने का मतलब क्या 
होता है। भारत का नाम लȂगे तो हमको यह पता लगेगा िक यह गणराज्य नया नहीं बना रहे हȅ। यहां 
िलच्छवी गण
राज्य रहा है, यहां शाक्य वंश का गणराज्य रहा है, यहां मÊलȗ क े गणराज्य रहे हȅ। 
डा. राधाकृ Íणन जी ने संिवधान सभा मȂ कहा िक जब उǄर क े क ु छ Ëयापारी दिक्षण मȂ गए, तब 
उनको पूछा गया िक आपके  राजा का नाम क्या है, तब उन्हȗने कहा ‘ आधे गणादी नाम, आधे 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
राजादी नाम’ आधे राज्य क े आदी ने और आधे गणȗ क े आदी ने – भारत का नाम अगर आता, तो 
आज जो भारत गणराज्य है, वह संिवधान क े कारण तो है ही, लेिकन हमारी जो मूलभूत परंपराएं 
है, उनका Ģितिनिधत्व करता है। वह नाम अगर आता तो क े. एम. मुंशी जी ने कहा है िक उस 
समय हमको ध्यान आता है िक यह भारत कोई 19
47 क े बाद नहीं बन रहा है, यह भारत Ģाचीन 
राÍटर् है। राम का नाम आता, भारत का नाम आता, तो यह आता िक राम ने जब लंका जीती और 
लÑमण ने कहा िक यह सोने की लंका है। राम जी, आप सोने की लंका छोड़कर अयोध्या क्यȗ चल 
रहे हो? तो राम जी ने कहा - 
'अिप Îवणर्मयी लंका न मे लÑमण रोचते। 
जननी जन्मभूिमǙ Îवगार्दिप गरीयसी'।। 
 
हे लÑमण – उसमȂ राम की भावना है। अगर भारत नाम देते, तो महान बुǉ की बात उसमȂ आती। 
महिर्ष अरिंवद ने िलखा है िक इस पृथ्वी पर िजतने लोगȗ ने जन्म िलया है, मनुÍय क े रूप  मȂ सबसे 
ताकतवर यिद कोई Ëयिƪ है, तो वह भगवान बुǉ क े रूप  मȂ Ģकट हुआ है, उनका नाम होता।  
सभापित महोदय, अगर भारत आता, तो िववेकानंद जी क े उपिनषदȗ का वह वाक्य लोगȗ को 
ध्यान आता –  
‘उिǄǞत जागर्त ĢाÃय वरािƐबोधत’ 
उठो, जागो और 2047 तक भारत को िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने तक रुको  मत, यह आता।  िफर भी, मȅ 
माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी को धन्यवाद देता हूं िक यह जो भारत की थोड़ी बहुत कमी रह गई थी, 
उन्हȗने उस कमी की पूिर्त कर दी। वह क ै से की? यह जो भारत का नया संसद भवन बना है, इसमȂ 
जो गैलरीज़ बनी हȅ, जो िचतर् बने हȅ, इसमȂ युगे युगीन भारत - युग युग मȂ भारत क ैसा था, वह इस 
संसद भवन मȂ बना है। वह कमी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने पूरी कर दी। यह सब भारत का काम 
है।  
सभापित महोदय, यहां पर दो-तीन बड़ी चचार् हुई। मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक मȅ 
आपके  गांव का ही हूं। मȅ भुƪभोगी हूं, मȅ झुंझुनूं गया था। झुंझुनूं मȂ आपातकाल मȂ जो मेरे साथ 
घटना हुई, वह सारी दुिनया को पता है। 25 जून , 1975 को िदÊली क े रामलीला मैदान मȂ 
लोकनायक जयĢकाश नारायण की बहुत बड़ी सभा थी। उस सभा मȂ मȅ भी था, उसमȂ आपके  
िपताजी कपूर्री ठाकु र जी भी थे। सारे लोग िदÊली की सभा मȂ थे, अटल िबहारी वाजपेई जी थे, सब 
थे। लोकनायक जयĢकाश नारायण जी ने आÏवान िकया िक चूंिक इंिदरा गांधी जी क े िखलाफ 
इलाहाबाद हाई कोटर् का फ ैसला आ गया और सुĢीम कोटर् ने उनको Îटे नहीं िदया, इसिलए वह 
सरकार अनिधकृ त सरकार है, अनिधकृ त सरकार क े आदेशȗ को नहीं मानȂगे। यह जयĢकाश जी 
की सभा मȅने देखी और मȅने देखा िक जब यह काम शुरू  हुआ, तो सबसे पहले गुजरात से शुरू  
हुआ, ĥÍटाचार क े िखलाफ हुआ। इतना बड़ा आंदोलन हुआ िक इंिदरा जी क े Ģधान मंतर्ी रहते हुए 
अपने मुख्य मंतर्ी को ĥÍटाचार क े कारण से राÍटर्पित शासन लगाकर हटाना पड़ा। यह नविनमार्ण 
आंदोलन था, वैसा आंदोलन िबहार मȂ चला और जयĢकाश जी क े साथ हज़ारȗ छातर् पटना मȂ 
Ģवेश करना चाहते थे, लेिकन चारȗ तरफ बिÊलयȗ से बांध िदया गया था। जयĢकाश बाबू जब 
पटना मȂ घुसने लगे, तो उनके  लािठयां लगीं, नाना जी देशमुख उनके  ऊपर हो गए और उनको 
बचाया। उस समय राÍटर् किव रामधारी िंसह िदनकर जी चेन्नई मȂ थे। चेन्नई से उन्हȗने कहा था,  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
115

 
 
‘समर शेष है, नहीं पाप का भागी क ेवल Ëयाध, 
जो तटÎथ हȅ, समय िलखेगा उनके  भी अपराध।’ 
उसके  कारण देशभर क े युवा JP Movement मȂ सÇपूणर् कर्ांित मȂ लग गए।  जब इलाहाबाद हाई 
कोटर् का फ ैसला आया, तो फ ैसले क े बाद अपील हुई, तो Justice Iyer, जो अपने वामपंथी िवचारȗ 
क े िलए Ģिसǉ थे, उनसे stay िमलने की उÇमीद थी और आमतौर पर stay िमलता भी है, लेिकन 
उन्हȗने साफ-साफ देखा िक Ģधान मंतर्ी कायार्लय मȂ काम करने वाला आदमी वहां पर एजȂट था, 
तो उन्हȗने stay देने से मना कर िदया।  उसके  बाद 25 त ारीख को रात 12 बज े फ़ख़रुǈीन अली 
अहमद जी ने इमरजȂसी लगाई।  मȅ 26 तारीख को सुबह-सुबह - उस समय रेिडयो और टेलीफोन 
नहीं थे, 27-28 साल की उĦ थी, कोटर् मȂ जाकर बैठा, तो एसपी ऑिफस से लोग आए और बोले 
िक आपको बुला रहे हȅ।  मȅने पूछा मुझसे क्या गलत
ी हो गई।  वे  मुझे पकड़ कर ले गए।  यह बात 
अच्छी हुई िक मुझे DIR मȂ िगरÄतार िकया था, MISA मȂ नहीं िकया।  मȅ उस समय की िÎथित बता 
रहा हूं।  एक घटना सारी दुिनया को याद है।  इमर
जȂसी लग गई और उस समय हिरदेव जोशी जी 
राजÎथान क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे।  एक िदन सुबह उन्हȗने देखा िक चारȗ तरफ पुिलस है, तो वे अपने घर 
क े पीछे से दीवार फांदकर भाग गए।  उन्हȗने देखा िक उन्हȂ िगरÄतार करने आ रहे हȅ।  यानी 
कांगर्ेस का मुख्य मंतर्ी यह देखने लगा िक उन्हȂ िगरÄतार करने आ गए।  उस समय यह िÎथित बन 
गई थी।  एक घटना मेरे साथ भी घटी।  जब मȅ सȂटर्ल जेल जयपुर से सीकर आ रहा था, तो एक 
साधू महाराज बैठे थे।  हमने Îटेशन पर देखा और सोचा िक इस िडÅबे मȂ चलते हȅ और उनको 
Ģणाम कर लेते हȅ।  हम Ãलेटफॉमर् की साइड से घुसे और दूसरी साइड Ãलेटफ ॉमर् भी नहीं था।  मुझे 
यह डर लग रहा था िक यिद इनसे बात कर ली, तो मȅ पकड़ा जाऊं गा, तो साधु महाराज भी 
क ूदकर चले गए। उनको भी भय था। हम कोटर् मȂ जाते, नारा लगाते िक न्यायपािलका अमर रहे 
और सारे वकी
ल भागकर चले जाते और हम अके ले ही रह जाते। मेरा सौभाग्य था िक मȅने बहस 
की, मुझे DIR मȂ पकड़ा था और भारतवषर् मȂ पहला क े स था, िजसमȂ मुझे discharge कर िदया 
गया।  उसके  बाद मȅ underground हुआ , िफर आप
के  झुंझुनूं गया।  जब मȅ झुंझुनूं गया, तो वहां 
कोटर् मȂ Ǜी सुरेश एच. माथुर, िडिÎटर्क्ट जज थे।  उस कोटर् मȂ मȅ बात कर रहा था, तो कोटर् मȂ मुझे 
डीएसपी और कोटर् वाले उनके  सामने से पकड़ कर घसीटते हुए ले गए और मुझे बहुत पीटा और 
उसके  बाद मुझे मरा हुआ समझकर रेल मȂ डालकर चले गए।  मȅ अके ला नहीं था।  इस सदन मȂ 
राजेन्दर् गहलोत जी भी बैठे हुए हȅ।  उन्हȂ डेढ़ घंटे तक िबजली क े करंट लगाए गए थे।  वे कह रहे 
थे िक इन बातȗ की चचार् मत कीिजए। उसके  बाद MISA क े warrant आ गए और झुंझुनूं क े अंदर 
िपटाई हुई। मȅ उसके  Ģम
ाण लेकर आया हूं। मȅ पढ़ना नहीं चाहता।  राजÎथान िवधान सभा मȂ क ेवल 
एक घटना अंिकत है, िजसमȂ गुमान मल लोढ़ा, जो हाईकोटर् से चीफ जिÎटस िरटायर हुए थे, तो 
उन्हȗने बोला िक एक घनÌयाम ितव
ाड़ी नाम का वकील वहां गया था, उसके  साथ इस Ģकार की 
घटना हुई। उन्हȗने अपनी िकताब मȂ भी िलखा है।  यह बात बोलने क े बाद ही उनको भी मीसा मȂ 
िगरÄतार करके  बंद कर िदया। उस समय कोट्सर् की हालत ऐसी कर दी थी िक कोटर् क े सामने 
कोई बहस नहीं कर सक
ता था, वकीलȗ की हालत ऐसी हो गई थी िक वकील साथ खड़े होने क े 
िलए तैयार नहीं थे,  साध ुओं की हालत ऐसी हो गई थी िक वे Ģणाम लेने क े िलए तैयार नहीं थे।  
भारत मȂ इम
रजȂसी क े दौरान काल कोठरी बनाई गई। संिवधान की इस गौरवमयी िवकास यातर्ा मȂ 
अगर कोई काला टीका है, तो वह 1975 का आपातकाल है।   
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 महोदय, उसके  बाद संशोधन िकया गया।  उसमȂ यह कर िदया िक भारत का राÍटर्पित, 
भारत का उपराÍटर्पित, भारत का लोक सभा अध्यक्ष और Ģधान मंतर्ी, इन सबके  िखलाफ कोई भी 
कोटर् या िकसी भी न्यायालय मȂ घपला हुआ हो, बेईमानी हुई हो, उसको वह सुन नहीं सकती।  
 और वह भी रेटर्ोÎपेिक्टव इफे क्ट से िकया। यह संिवधान संशोधन का पहला कानून था। 
क्यȗिक इंिद
रा जी का जो चुनाव हुआ था, उस अवैध चुनाव को वैध करना था, इसिलए उसे 
रेटर्ोÎपेिक्टव इफे क्ट से लागू िकया गया।  
महोदय, मȅ इसके  दो और उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं। एक क े स, िजसकी आज सभी लोगȗ ने 
चचार् की है, वह क ेशवानंद भारती का क े स है। शायद आप उससे सहमत नहीं है, लेिकन वह ऐसा 
क े स था, जो एक की जजमȂट से हुआ था। उस क े स क े होने क े बाद, उस
मȂ जो तीन जज थे, वे 
Ģभािवत हुए थे। महोदय, ये अभी बात कर रहे थे िक आपने संवैधािनक संÎथाओं का क्षरण कर 
िदया, संवैधािनक संÎथाओं का महत्व कम कर िद
या,  लेिकन मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक इस क े स मȂ 
तीन जज थे – शेलत, गर्ोवर और हेगड़े। ये तीनȗ विरÍठता मȂ ऊपर थे। चूंिक इन्हȗने मूल ढाँचे क े 
पक्ष मȂ िलखा था और ए.एन.रे, िजन्हȗने मूल ढाँचे क े िखलाफ िलखा था, उन्हȂ इन तीनȗ से 
सुपरसीड कराकर भारत का चीफ जिÎटस बना िदया गया, जबिक वे ती
न जज न्यायपािलका क े 
साथ थे।  
महोदय, इसके  अलावा एक और घटन ा हुई थी। यह एडीएम जबलपुर का क े स है। इसे पाँच 
जजȗ ने सुना था। इसको सुनने वाले पाँच जज थे। उन्हȗने यह क े स सुना था िक अगर िकसी आदमी 
को पकड़कर ले जाएं, तो क्या वह अपने Ģाणȗ की रक्षा क े िलए कोटर् मȂ जा सकता है या नहीं जा 
सकता है, उसे हेिबयस कापर्स का अि
धकार ĢाÃत है या नहीं है? वह पाँच जजेज की बȂच थी। उस 
क े स को सभी ने सुना तथा चार और एक से जजमȂट हुआ था। चार जजेज ने एक फ ैसल ा िदया था। 
उस समय एच.आर. खन्ना ने यह ĢÌन पूछा था िक अगर पुिलस अफसर िकसी को पकड़कर ले 
जाए, उसकी दुÌमनी हो और वह उसे गोली मार दे, तो क्या होगा? सरकार क े एडवोके ट जनर ल 
ने जवाब िदया िक इसका जवाब तो बाद मȂ िमलेगा। यह हो गया िक गोली मार दो, गोली मारने की 
छू ट हो गई। उसके  बाद एच.आर. खन्ना को चीफ जिÎटस बनना था, लेिक न  चूँिक उन्हȗने कहा 
था िक Ëयिƪ क े पास हेिबयस कापर्स का राइट है, इसिलए उन्हȂ सुपरसीट िकया गया और 
सुपरसीट करके  एम.एच.बेग को भारत का Ģमुख न्यायाधीश बना िदया गया। मȅ यह कहना चाहता 
हूं िक उस समय न्यायालय को भी इस Ģकार से दबा िदया गया था। ....(समय की घं टी)... 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद दूंगा। ये कह रहे थे – यह  
संशोधन, वह संशोधन। महोदय, आप सभी शैǹूÊड काÎट, शैǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस और ओबीसी क े 
िरज़वȃशन क े बारे मȂ जान
ते हȅ। अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने शैǹूÊड काÎट वगर् क े िलए Ģमोशन 
मȂ आरक्षण देने क े िलए संिवधान संशोधन िकया था और माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने भी संिवधान 
संशोधन िक
या है। उन्हȗने यह संशोधन िकया है िक जो ईडÅÊयूएस वगर् है, इसमȂ ĤाǨण, बिनए, 
राजपूत, कायÎथ आिद िजतने भी वंिचत वगर् क े लोग हȅ, िजनके  िलए आरक्षण नहीं था, िजन्हȂ हाटर् 
बिनȊग हो रही थी, उन सभी लोगȗ को इस आधार पर सोÌयली, इकोनॉिम कली और पोिलटकली 
जिÎटस देने क े िलए आरक्षण िदया गया है।  
महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक पोिलिटकल जिÎटस तो उसी िदन हो गया था, िजस िदन 
लोक सभा, िवधान सभा मȂ आरक्षण कर िदया गया था, सामािजक जिÎट स भी उसी िदन हो गया 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
117

 
 
था, िजस िदन ओबीसी क े िलए आरक्षण कर िदया गया था और इकोनॉिमक जिÎटस भी उस िदन 
हो गया, िजस िदन ईडÅÊयूएस वगर् क े िलए संशोधन करके  उन्हȂ िरज़वȃशन िदया गया था। 
महोदय, उन्हȗने यह काम िकया है। 
  सभापित महोदय, मȅ यही बात कहना चाहूंगा िक भ ारत क े संिवधान क े इितहास मȂ इससे 
बड़ी घटना और क ु छ नहीं हो सकती है, हमȂ इससे Ģेरणा लेनी चािहए। महोदय, और भी काम हȅ, 
लेिकन अगर हम एक-एक काम िगनȂगे, तो हमȂ पता चलेगा िक हमारे संिवधान िनमार्ताओं की जो 
भावना थी, उस भावना को माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने पहचाना है।  
 सभापित महोदय, मȅ अंत मȂ एक और बात कहकर अपनी बात समाÃत कर
ता हूं। आज जो 
यह बहस िदख रही है, आज जो यह आज़ादी िदख रही है, यह आज़ादी Îवतंतर्ता सेनािनयȗ क े 
कारण िमली है। आपातकाल मȂ संघषर् करने वाले, लोकतंतर् सेनािनयȗ क े कारण आज यह संिवध
ान 
िंज़दा है और इस संिवधान की यातर्ा चल रही है, इसिलए उन सभी लोकतंतर् सेनािनयȗ का िकसी 
न िकसी रूप  मȂ सÇमान होना चािहए – मȅ आपसे इस बात का िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं।   
सभापित महोदय, कहने क े िलए तो बहुत बातȂ थीं, मȅने तैयारी भी पूरी की थी, लेिकन आपका 
इशारा हो रहा है, इसिलए मȅ आपको और सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ को धन् यवाद देते हुए अपनी बात 
समाÃत करता हूं, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                                                    
      
Ǜी सभापित: वह एक बात कही गई है। घनÌयाम जी,  
 
"न जी भर क े देखा ना कोई बात की 
बड़ी आरज़ू थी मुलाक़ात की।" 
 
Now, Shri Milind Murli Deora; 15 minutes. 
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवड़ा (महाराÍटर्): सर, आज हम भारत क े संिव
धान क े 75वȂ वषर् की 
गौरवशाली यातर्ा पर चचार् कर रहे हȅ। िपछले सÃताह और आज क े िदन हमȂ लोक सभा और राज् य  
सभा मȂ अन्य सांसदȗ क े भाषण सुनने का अवसर िमला। Sir, I know, the wish of the Chair, 
under your leadership, that when everyone  comes together, India can achieve great 
things.  I think that is the fundamental message when we reme mber and honour the 
founding fathers of this Constitution. सर, हमारे पसर्नल पोिलिटकल िडफरȂसेज़ हो सकते हȅ, 
लेिकन भारत क े संिवधान और लोकतंतर् से ऊपर क ु छ नहीं है।  सर, मȅ बहुत ही Îपेिसिफक पाँच 
Ãवाइंट हाइलाइट करना चाहता हूँ, which, I believe, have strengthened the Constitution in 
the recent past, without going deep into history. सर, सबसे पहले, जब हमारी 
काँÎटीǷूएंट असेÇबली ने 1950 मȂ हमारे काँÎटीǷूशन को अपनाया, 25 years later, in 1975,
 
when the Constitution’s adoption was being celebrated – Sir, I am willing to disclose 
my age -- I was not born.  Twenty-five years ago, when we were celebrating 50 years 
of the Constitution, I was not a Member of th is House.  Today, at the age of 48, I am 
very privileged to be able to participate and join my fellow Indians in commemorating 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
75 years of the adoption of our Constitution.  For that, I wish to congratulate the 
Government for finally celebrating and recognizing Samvidhan Diwas, 65 years after 
the Constitution was adopted, starting from 2015. 
 Sir, I firmly believe, younger people are watching us today and this annual 
commemoration, this debate today and tomo rrow and the debate last week will go a 
long way in inspiring and educating future generations about the values enshrined in 
our Constitution and about the vast and timeless contributions of Dr. Ambedkar 
towards strengthening India. That is the firs t point that I wish to congratulate this 
Government for, for strengthening this Co nstitution in the recent past.  Secondly, मेरे 
से पहले कई लोगȗ नȂ धारा 370 को लेकर अपने भाषणȗ मȂ इस Ãवाइंट को हाइलाइट िकया। Sir, I 
have no doubt in my mind that the abroga tion of Article 370 in 2019, which led to 
Jammu and Kashmir’s full integration into In dia’s constitutional framework, ensured a 
uniform application of laws across the country and also upheld India’s sovereignty. 
 सर, मȅ अपने खुद क े अनुभव से कह सकता हूं, क्यȗिक ध ारा  370 हटने क े बाद मȅ Îवयं 
तीन बार कÌमीर जा चुका हूं।  And I have seen the biggest benefits of the abrogation of 
Article 370 with the Kashmiri youth. Why were  they deprived is a separate issue, a 
political issue.  Thirdly, the GST Counc il today, which operates on a consensus 
model, takes all States along. The NITI Aayog, which has replaced the Planning 
Commission, has empowered the States in decision-making and upheld federal 
principles of our Constitution. The fourth way that I believe the Constitution has been 
strengthened, 2023 मȂ लोक सभा और Îटेट असेÇबलीज़ मȂ मिहलाओं की 33 परस Ȃट सीट्स 
आरिक्षत करने वाला जो मिहला आरक्षण िबल है, मȅ मानता हूं िक वह हमारे देश क े लेिजÎलेिटव 
Ģोसेस को अि
धक मजबूत बनाने मȂ एक बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् कदम है। हम भी चाहते हȅ िक इसे जÊद 
से जÊद इिÇÃलमȂट िकया जाए।   
सर, आज की िडबेट माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने इिनिशयेट की।  मȅ उनकी बातȗ से पूरी 
तरह से सहमत हूं।  In my opinion, the fi
fth way that the Indian Constitution has been 
strengthened in the recent past. After all, what does the Constitution talk about? 
Equality, justice and inclusion through the use of technology. I think, it is fair to say 
that there is a constitutional revolution underway in India through the use of platforms 
like Aadhaar, Unified Payments  Interface and Digital India. नवÇबर, 2024 मȂ, लाÎट मंथ, 
the UPI platform generated almost 15 billion transactions. This is unheard of anywhere 
in the world and is a very, ve ry good example of India's fina ncial inclusion initiatives. 
Today, 75 per cent of India's villages have access to, at least, one digital banking 
service. सर, डा. अÇबेडकर और हमारे संिवधान क े िनमार्ताओं ने - they may not have 
foreseen smart-phones and digital IDs, but I have no doubt that, today, they would 
welcome and embrace the use of technologies  to empower India's weakest sections. 
इस संदभर् मȂ मȅ एक बार िफर सरकार को उनके  िव
 ज़न, डेिडके शन और लगातार फोकस क े िलए 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
119

 
 
देश क े सभी नागिरकȗ की ओर से बहुत-बहुत बधाई देना चाहूंगा। ...( Ëयवधान)... क्या आप 
यूपीआई यूज नहीं करते हȅ?  ...( Ëयवधान)...  Sir, there are some inconvenient truths, 
because my friend interrupted me, that I must  raise and, on these inconvenient truths 
that many Members in this House starting fr om here to there, I know, will agree with 
me. ...(Interruptions)...Listen to me. ...( Interruptions)...सर, आज अगर कोई भी 
राजनीितक दल अपने अंदर डेमोकर्े सी नहीं ला सक ता  है, तो वह भारत मȂ संिवधान और लोकतंतर् 
को क ै से मजबूत करेगा? …(Ëयवधान)...Now you will agree.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Some parties, today, very vociferously vo iced their opinions on market monopolies. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  Ǜी गोखले, आप बैठकर न बोलȂ।   
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA :  But, they still have no t been able to counter 
monopolies within their own parties.  Let us  be honest. World over, when we look at 
democracies, when we look at political part ies, ultimately the health of a country's 
democracy is dependent on the democratic health of its parties. I have not named any 
party, but I urge parties -- those who know who I am talk ing about and have a guilty 
conscience – to please introspect and try to  democratise. Another inconvenient truth 
and a fake narrative ...(Interruptions)... 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव:  िवषय पर बोिलए ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित:  Ãलीज, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA: Sir, another fake narrative  and inconvenient truth, जो मȅ 
रेज़ करना चाहूंगा।  क ु छ ही िदन पहले इंडी एलायंस क े साथी, जो जÇमू-कÌमीर क े मुख्य मंतर्ी हȅ, 
तत्कालीन मुख्य मंतर्ी हȅ... 
 I don’t think anyone has raised that issue today.  That is the issue of Electroni
c 
Voting Machines (EVMs).  क ु छ लोग जब चुनाव जीतते हȅ, तो EVMs का Îवागत करते हȅ, 
लेिकन जब चुनाव हारते हȅ, तो कहते हȅ िक EVM मȂ क ु छ गड़बड़ है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Sir, I have 
fought...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ।  िम िंलद  जी, आप बोलȂ।  
 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA :  Sir, I have fought five elections till date.  My first 
election was in the year 2004.  Just for the information of the House, I would like to 
say that the EVMs were not in troduced in one sh ot.  They were introduced in pilot 
phases.  Sir, 2004 was the first Lok Sa bha election where every parliamentary 
constituency in the country had EVMs as a means of electing their candidates. I 
believed in them then, and I believe in them now.  And, I am willing to say today that if 
there is an iota of credible evidence that EVMs can be hacked, I will be the first one to 
fight for a better system.  But, आज क ु छ लोग कह रहे हȅ िक EVMs को हटाइए और EVMs 
क े बजाय paper ballot लाइए।  मȅ उनसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक paper ballot भी कोई perfect 
solution नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप िबÊकु ल सही कह रहे हȅ।  Paper ballots came with the 
risk of booth capturing and manual tampering.   Today, in an era, when we are talking 
about environmental preservation, how many  trees do we have to cut for paper 
ballots?  And, most importantly, the issue of human errors is th ere.  Sir, Election 
Commission of India ने 2017 मȂ, I think, राÍ टर्ीय Îतर पर एक पहला EVM hackathon 
कायर्कर्म आयोिजत िकया था।  सर, आज मȅ आपके  माध्यम से Election Commission of India से 
िनवेदन करू ँगा िक वह हर साल national नहीं, बिÊक global level EVM challenge hackathon 
को arrange करे और ऐसा challenge arrange कर े, िजसमȂ वह हर राजनीितक दल को invite 
करे, दुिनया भर क े सबसे अच्छे hackers को invite करे।  Let them try to  hack the machines 
that they claim are hackable, but if they are unable to hack the machines, then with 
grace, let us all accept one inconvenient tr uth that blaming EVMs was only an excuse 
because there was no inner party democrac y and inner party transparency in their 
party.   
 सर, आज भारत का संिवधान िवÌव क े िलए एक Ģकाश Îतंभ, एक light house, एक 
beacon है।  At a time, when you look at democracies around the world, from the 
oldest democracy, the United States, to th e newer democracies in the global south, 
in the western world, when democracies wo rldwide are grappling with voter mistrust, 
with political instability, anti-establishmen t protests, our Constitution’s ability to 
balance tradition and modernity stands out.  सर, हमने िदखाया है िक अपने सांÎकृ ितक 
मूÊयȗ पर कायम रहते हुए, बदलते समय क े साथ पिरवतर्न क ै से िकया जा सकता है।  A nd, we 
must remember and we must take pride in the fact that from South Africa’s post-
aparthied Constitution in 1996, all the way to Nepal’s Constitution in 2015, several 
countries have drawn inspiration from India’s Constitution over the past 75 years, 
especially in the areas of federalism, affirmative action and Fundamental Rights.   
 सर, आज जरूरत  है िक हम सब हमारी जो petty राजनीित है, उससे ऊपर उठ कर यह 
सुिनिÌचत करȂ िक हमारा संिवधान और लोकतंतर् अगली पीिढ़यȗ क े िलए और भी मजबूत बने।  मȅने 
जो एक Ãवाइंट छेड़ा िक हमȂ खुद की पािर्टयȗ मȂ लोकतंतर् लाना चािहए, आज मȅ गवर् से कह सकता 
हूँ िक मेरी पाटीर् क े नेता, एकनाथ िंशदे जी ने और एक बार िश व सेना मȂ democracy restore की।  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
121

 
 
उन्हȗने िशव सेना मȂ एक Ģकार से राजशाही का शासन बंद िकया और democracy को restore 
िकया।  And, I would like to share a text message that I received from an American 
friend of mine.   
 He is a democrat.  …(Interruptions)… You may have received those messages.  
…(Interruptions)… I know who receives those messages.  …(Interruptions)… Please 
don’t make me open my mouth.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: I can also open my mouth. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA : Please open it.  Sir, I would like to share a text 
message from a Democrat American who, by the way, has friends across the sides.  I 
am just quoting what he said.  He said, "Milind, the fact that a young man, selling tea 
at a railway station, could dream of becoming the Prime Minister of the world’s 
biggest democracy, and, actually overcomes all odds to achieve his dream, speaks 
volumes about your country, India’s voters and the Constitution, and the vibrancy of 
its democracy.  It is a story that inspires me and several of my friends."  
 सर, आज एक जरूरतम ंद पिरवार से आये हुए मोदी जी क े साथ-साथ भारत को अपनी 
पहली आिदवासी मिहला राÍटर्पित िम
ली हȅ, यह हम सभी को भारतीय होने पर गवर् महसूस कराता 
है। I hope all the hon. Members,  especially, some of my frie nds on this side, will take 
my suggestions in the right spirit, will try to reform and will try to learn from their 
mistakes.  Thank you very much.  Jai Hind!      
                                                                                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi.  You have 15 minutes’ 
time. 
 
डा. अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी (तेलंगाना): माननीय उपसभापित जी, माननीय सांसदगण, मȅ संिवधान 
की 75वीं वषर्गांठ क े उप
लÑय  मȂ इस वातार् मȂ एक अत्यंत सरल लेिकन एक अत्यंत िविचतर् और 
किठन ĢÌन क े साथ अपनी बात शुरू  करना चाहता हूँ।   वह ĢÌन यह है िक 1930 से 1960 क े बीच 
मȂ जो लगभग 30-40 देश साĦाज्यवाद से, उपिनवेशवाद से  Îवतंतर् हुए, यूक े से, बेिÊ जयम से, 
ģांस से, नीदरलȅड इत्यािद से Îवतंतर् हुए, वहां की colonialism से िनकले, उनमȂ िसफर् एक 
अके ला कोरा भारत ऐसा देश है, जो उन 30-40 देशȗ मȂ से आज एक गौरवश ाली गणतंतर् है, 
लोकतंतर् है और आज यह 75 वषर् बाद भी बरकरार है।  यह एक बहुत ही िविचतर् चीज है।  इसका 
कारण क्या है? इसके  कई कारण हȅ।  सबसे बड़ा कारण होता है - गुड लक, लेिकन अगर और 
गहराई से देखा जाए, तो मȅ समझता हूँ िक इसमȂ एक अǌुत जुगलबंदी थी।  मȅ यह नहीं कह रहा हूँ 
िक इसका एक ही कारण है।  एक कार
ण िनिÌचत रूप  से उस अǌुत जुगलबंदी का है, जो गांधी 
और नेहरू  क े बीच मȂ थी और जो हमारी GNP की trinity थी - गांधी, नेहरू  और पटेल की, तो उस 
िंनदनीय नेहरू  ने क ु छ तो ठी
क िकया होगा, क ु छ तो ऐसे संÎथागत और गैर-संÎथागत ÎतÇभ 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
हमारे संिवधान क े बनाए हȗगे।  आज अगर उन 30-40 दे शȗ मȂ आप एिशया मȂ देखȂ, अģीका मȂ 
देखȂ या साउथ अमेिरका मȂ देखȂ, तो उन सभी देशȗ मȂ आपको संिवधान क े, संिवधानवाद क े और 
constitutionalism क े िसफर् खंडहर िदखȂगे।  यहाँ अगर एक ने हमको Îवतंतर्त ा िदलवाई और 
दूसरे ने उसको महफू ज़ रखा, सुरिक्षत रखा, तो इन दोनȗ ने िमलकर क ु छ तो ठीक िकया होगा।   
सर, अब हम यह देखते हȅ िक ये कौन से संवैधािनक ÎतÇभ हȅ, िजन्हȗने 75 वषș से इस देश को 
गौरवशाली बनाकर रखा है, जो िक िवÌव का सबसे बड़ा गणतंतर् है।  उसके  साथ-साथ हम यह भी 
देखते हȅ िक उन Îत
Çभȗ की वतर्मान पिरभाषा क्या है, उन ÎतÇभȗ का वतर्मान ÎवाÎथ्य क ैसा है, 
उनका Îवरू
प क्या है और उनका आकार क्या है। 
 Friends, the first of those pillars, the no n-institutional pillars, is secularism, one 
of the most misunderstood, most abused word s, no doubt.  It is a self-protective 
mechanism or idea.  We do no largesse, no mercy to practice secularism.  We must 
do it in supreme selfish national and self-int erest.  India is planet Earth’s most diverse 
spot, and, when the American s talk about salad bowl or others talk of the melting 
pot, nothing captures India’s diversity.  We have 22 Scheduled Languages, 700 
mother tongues and 2,000 dialects.  
 We have the world’s four religions born here, the second or the third largest of 
other religions in the world and so on and so forth.  What is secularism?  I love Prof. 
Bhargava’s Lincolnian definition of seculari sm.  He said, why did Lincoln say ‘for the 
people’? It is understood, democracy is for the people.  Why did he say ‘by the 
people’? It is understandable.  It is thos e who are elected by th e people.  Then he 
said, why did he say, ‘of the people’? An d then Bhargava answers his own question 
by saying, it is to convey a sense of co-o wnership of democracy to the last man, in 
the last row.  It is a co-belonging of democracy to everyone, the majority and the 
minority, the under-privileged and the over-privileged.  And that is the essence of 
secularism.  Before I come to its current health, there is another word in our Preamble 
which cross-fertilizes and rein forces it in a big way.  िजसको हम ज्यादातर भूल जाते हȅ 
‘fraternity’,  a word far superior to the negative word of tolerance.  It is a positive word 
which constitutionally mandates us to cel ebrate each other. ‘Identity’, it cross-
fertilizes and reinforces secularism and it br ings in all the other related concepts of 
pluralism, inclusiveness and diversity. अब हम इसकी वतर्मान हालत पर दो-चार िमनट 
िबताते हȅ।  इसकी वतर्मान हालत न्यू इंिडया मȂ, न्यू बीजेपी क े शासन मȂ क्या है?  सबस े पहले है 
भय का वा
तावरण, अिवÌवास का वातावरण, िवभाजन का वातावरण।  इसके  िलए कोई थमार्मीटर 
नहीं चािहए।  आप भी जा नते हȅ, हम भी जानते हȅ।  पुराने सȂटर्ल हॉल से लेकर अÊपसंख्यकȗ तक 
यह भय का वातावरण है।  वह सȂटर्ल हॉल आजकल क ȅटीन हो गया है, उसका substitute यहाँ 
पर है।  अब वह सȂटर्ल हॉल तो नहीं रहा।  लेिकन अपने क ं धे क े पीछे झांक कर बोलना - इसे कहते 
हȅ गणतंतर् का भय।  मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक ऐसा वातावरण 75 साल  मȂ कभ
ी नहीं आया, िसवाय 
उस 18 महीन े मȂ, आपातकाल मȂ, िजसके  ऊपर मȅ अभी आने वाला हूँ।  ऐस ा कभी नहीं हुआ।  मȅ 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
123

 
 
इसके  दो उदाहरण देना चाहता हूँ, उसके  बाद मȅ आगे बढ़ू ँगा।  एक उदाहरण तो अभी िपछले हÄते 
का है।  दोनȗ मȂ मȅ पेश भी हुआ था।  Places of Worship Act  मȂ क्या हुआ और उच्चतम न्यायालय 
ने तीन-चार िदन पहले अपने ऑडर्र मȂ क्या कहा - मȅ उसकी बात नहीं कर रहा हूँ, क् यȗिक वह 
आप सब जानते हȅ।  उन्हȗने यह कहा िक जब तक हम इसको िनणीर्त करते हȅ, तब तक एक 
Ģितबंध रखȂ, एक शांित बहाल रखȂ, एक Îटेिबिलटी रखȂ, Ǜǉा रखȂ।  महत्व पूणर् यह है िक उस 
िहयिंरग मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार का क्या Îटȅड था।  क Ȃ दर् सरकार को तो टेिक्नकल रूप  से न्यूटर्ल होना 
चािहए था।  उन्हȗने कहा िक यह आंतिरक आदेश नहीं दीिजए।  कब तक नहीं दीिजए?  जब तक 
आप इसका िनणर्य करȂगे, तब तक भी नहीं दीिज
ए।  िनणर्य क्या था?  बड़ा  समझदार िनणर्य था 
िक कोई नया सूट दजर् नहीं होगा और जो पुराने सूट हȅ, उनमȂ कोई भी Ģभावशाली इफे िक्टव 
ऑडर्र, आंतिरक या अंितम नहीं पास िकया जा एगा।  इस सरकार ने इसका िवरोध िकया और आप 
बात करते हȅ secularism और fraternity की, जब तक िसफर् िनणर्य आता है तब तक।   
इसका दूसरा उदाहरण यह है। क्या क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने कभी भी िकसी रूप  मȂ, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी तो बहुत बड़े हȅ, गृह मंतर्ी भी बहुत बड़े हȅ, िकसी क ेन्दर्ीय मंतर्ी की यह िहÇमत हुई िक यहाँ इतने 
सालȗ से जो यह बुलडो
जर राजनीित चली, िजससे संबंिधत एक मामले मȂ मȅ पेश हुआ था और 
उच्चतम न्यायालय ने क ु छ हÄते पहले रोक लगाई, कभी भी िकसी ने उसके  िवरुǉ बोला?  यह  
आपके  सबसे बड़े Ģदेश से शुरू  हुआ था।  क्या िक
सी को एक शÅद बोलने क े िहÇमत थी?  बिÊक 
your CMs glorified bulldozer raaz.   There was an inter-C. M., inter-State competition 
as to who is the more Rambo CM to practi ce bulldozer and an award virtually was to 
be given for bulldozer CMs and bulldozer polit ics.  But this is fraternity,  this is 
secularism.  Look at the statistics.  Who are the victims of that bulldozer raaz?  
Around 95-98 per cent of them belong to  one community.  No notice was given.  I 
make a protest, I make a poster, my house is struck down.  But not one of you had 
guts to speak up against it.  Why?  Beca use you cannot be allowed to do that.  So 
friends, this is the hiatus between Consti tution, between constitutionalism, between 
secularism, between fraternity and between r eality.  You really wore the democratic 
cloak but you wielded the autocracy’s blade.   
 The Constitution crumbled in the shadows you made.  Because, friends, when 
rulers play puppeteers with de mocratic frame, the Constituti on is but a pawn in that 
game.   Let us turn to some other underlying pillars.  One is federalism.   It is a very 
strange country where our framers made it largely a unitary country.  Somebody 
called it a quasi-federal because of largel y unitary focus.  But the great achievement 
of India is what we call inadvertent federa lism or accidental federalism. Today, after 
75 years, we are much more federal in oper ational reality than our framers conceived 
of in constitutional design.  This is not the place to go into it because you had fiscal 
federalism. We devolve today 45 per cent out of the funds to the States.  We started 
with 30 per cent.  We have Panchayati Raj.  We have m unicipal decentralisation. We 
have linguistic federalism. It is the thr ee-language formula.  We have economic 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
liberalisation. That is a different story.  Bu t we have operational real federalism of a 
far, far higher degree than our framers envisaged or created or designed.   And 
federalism is very important for regional parties.  It is a safety valve which channels the 
three Ds -- discomfort, dissatisfaction and dissent at the local level.  Otherwise, like a 
pressure cooker, if it did not release it there, it would explode at the Centre.  Hon. 
Prime Minister has repeatedly us ed it.  I don't like the word jumla for the Prime 
Minister.  But let us say the phrase is, cooperative federalism, competitive federalism.  
Allow me to make you smell the coffee and smell reality for two minutes.  Take two 
examples of federalism -- the theoretical an d the real in New India and the new BJP.  
A State in the South, we know the name.  A State in the East, we  know the name.  A 
State in the North, we know the name.  I happen to be coincidentally counsel for all 
these three States. Ten Bills are passed by  the State in the South.  The hon. 
Governor takes one and a half years to decide , not to decide.  Because if he sends it 
back, as we all know, the State can pass it again.  So he decides not to decide. I go 
to court.  The court passes an order.  So he then decides one, and nine he refers 
back. The Assembly sends it back after tw o days.  Again, you have Kumbhakaran’s 
six-month sleep.  Then again you go to cour t. This time, the hon. Governor, well 
advised as he is, sends it and refers it to  the President.  What  suffers? Governance 
for that State.  The same thing happene d in the Eastern State. The same thing 
happened in the Northern state. You all si tting there are Members of those States.  
Now, what is the point? The point is that  Babasaheb Ambedkar said there cannot be 
two swords in one scabbard. एक Çयान मȂ दो तलवारȂ नहीं हो सकतीं। The elected 
Government is entitled to make its mistakes .  It is democratically elected CM who is 
democratically entitled to make mistakes. If  he makes a mistake, the Governor is not 
a Super CM to correct him.  In fact, in the next paragraph of that दो Çयान वाली 
paragraph, Babasaheb Ambedkar says that  we are thinking of only nominating 
Governors; nobody might be ready to accept the job because he doesn't have any 
powers.  But today we have Super CMs.  And somebody else, not me, called them *  
of the Central Government.  
Sir, another example of federalism, competitive federalism, cooperative 
federalism is the CBI.  This unwanted, uninvited guest en ters all our houses.  Both 
Mr. Sibal and I are doing many cases on that.  He enters a State without any consent.  
No general consent, no special consent, but on very puerile and very strange grounds 
in any number of cases.  Is this federali sm? This is federalism in tatters. This is 
democracy dancing on the edge of ruin when power poisons the pillars of our 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
125

 
 
Constitution. Remember, federalism was held  30 years ago to be part of the basic 
structure. It was 30 years ago. Other pillars include the media and the bureaucracy.  
Sir, you have given me two minutes.  More than two minutes. I have got four minutes.  
I need it.   I will be very fast. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairman has given you 15 minutes. 
 
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI:  Sir, bureaucracy is supposed to be the steel frame.  
It is another pillar of our Constitution.  Is it a mud frame or a Estraw frame today?  Put 
your hand on your heart and ask.  The test which is paramount is servility and loyalty.  
HMV is the qualifying condition. 
 It is not the old record of music we love.  HMV means His Master’s Voice.  
...(Interruptions)...Any independence is met with retribution, fear, career 
promotions, transfer, etc.  From a watchdog, you made it into a lapdog and this is 
decimation of yet another pillar of the Co nstitution. Then comes media and here I 
blame the media more than the Governme nt. The media typifies the Margdarshak 
Mandal’s eminence grise , Advaniji, who said, "When we asked you to bend, you 
crawled."‘गोदी मीिडया’ तो शÅद भी वषर् 2014 क े बाद ही बना है। As we see this remarkable 
cocktail of overambitious anchors and me dia owners, there are pre-selected, pre-
curated and pre-committed participants with  motivated, slanted, distorted themes, 
etc. We see this toxic triangle every even ing. I call it verbal terrorism and visual 
extremism. But, this is because godi has been converted largely into a godi media. It 
doesn't help anyone. This is an institutio n which was called the fourth pillar. It was 
called the fourth pillar. Press freedom is nowhere mentioned in our Constitution. But it 
is given the status of a fourth pillar. ...(Interruptions)...मेरा बोलने का समय कम है, 
इसिलए मȅ आपको जवाब नहीं दे रहा हूं।  Then comes ven
 detta politics. India is fortunate; 
unlike the two ladies who can't  sit in the Central Hall in Bangladesh, and unlike Zia 
and Nawaz Sharif who can't sit in the Central Hall in Pakistan, we were fortunate that 
we did not have vendetta politics. It started, in a way, in a South Indian State. ( Time-
bell rings.) It then travelled to an East Indian State. It then went to the battle of the 
Sardars in a North Indian State. But, largely, the Central Government was free from it. 
Today, as one of your biggest alliance pa rtners, you have the agencies, the three 
agencies we know well. And today, not on ly the laundry factory analogy, but a very 
good cartoon came, when the Pope said, "Son, if you confess, all sins are forgiven." 
So, the Indian man standing there on the side  said, "No, Sir. All sins are forgiven if 
you join the ruling party." Sir, there are many more examples. My time is limited. I will 
end by saying िक बार-बार आपने आपातकाल की बात की। आप िबÊकु ल सही कह रहे हȅ, 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
आपातकाल मȂ गलितयां हुई हȅ। आप मानकर चिलए। मȅ मानता हूं, मȅ ÎपÍट कहता हूं। कांगर्ेस से 
पहले भी कहा है। पहली बात तो एक तकर् और क ुतकर् की बात है िक यह क्या बात है िक आपकी 
90 परसȂट Îप
ीचेज़ पहले अमȂडमȂट से, 1950 से शुरू  होती हȅ। आज क े भारत मȂ जो िवकृ ितयां आई 
हȅ, हम उनकी बात कर रहे हȅ।   Sir, half a minute! उन िवकृ ितयȗ का उǄर क्या है, िक गलती 
आपने की या नेहरू  जी ने की, तो हम भी करȂगे। यह लॉिजकल नहीं है, लेिकन दूसरी बात यह िक 
यह आपातकाल एक सीमा से बाध्य था, यह 18 महीने का था। जना
देश सबसे बड़ा होता है। इंिदरा 
गांधी जी क े आपातकाल क े बाद इंिदरा गांधी जी को जनादेश ने वापस चुनािवत िकया। यह 
आपातकाल एक संवैध
ािनक िवकृ ित थी। जो संिवधान अनुमोिदत करती है, संिवधान allow करती 
है। संिवधान क े अनुसार हुआ, गलितयां हुईं, अंत हुआ। आज इस अघोिषत आपातकाल की क्या 
सीमा है? क्या संवैधािनक Ģितबंध है? क्या संवैध
ािनक क ंटर्ोल है -   Zero! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Singhviji, please conclude.  
 
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI: Sir, can I take half a minute more? You have already 
taken almost two minutes.  
 Sir, just 30 seconds! I am ending with what I started, not with words, but with 
a warning. With great respect to you and to  the House, I say that the Constitution, 
that sacred scripture of our sovereignty, is under siege. The pillars of democracy 
tremble as tyranny tiptoes into our temples of power. The sanctity of secularism is 
being shredded, federalism is fract ured and freedom is fettered. ( Time-bell rings. ) 
We are witnessing an era where institutions are being inca pacitated, dissent 
demonized and truth throttled. The custod ians of democracy have become its 
conspirators. (Time-bell rings.)  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
 
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI : The protectors of liberty are now its predators. Sir, 
we all have to act like citizens, and we all have to speak out and speak the truth. I am 
very grateful for the time given to me. Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, before I invi te Vaikoji, I would like to 
inform you, since there are many Members who are yet to take part in the ongoing 
discussion, if the House agrees, we may exte nd the sitting of the House till 8 p.m.  
Okay! 
6.00 P.M. 
Now, Mr. Vaiko, three minutes please.  …(Interruptions)…  Three minutes is the time 
which has been given to you.     
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
127

 
 
 
SHRI VAIKO:  Some people take ha lf-an-hour, some people take forty minutes and 
you are giving me three minutes. I don’t want to speak.   
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  P l e a s e .   …(Interruptions)…  This is the time which has 
been mentioned here.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI VAIKO:  I don’t want to speak.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  This depends upon you.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI VAIKO:  You may call somebody else.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik, three minutes.  
 
SHRI PRAKASH CHIK BARAIK (West Bengal) :  Thank you respected Deputy 
Chairman, Sir, for giving me this opportunity.  मȅ आज भारत क े संिवधान क े ऊपर हो रही 
चचार् मȂ अपनी पाटीर् ऑल इंिडया तृणमूल कांगर्ेस की ओर से बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। सर, मȅ 
यहां जो खड़ा हूं, यह भारत क े संिवधान की वजह से खड़ा हूं और मेरे राज्
य की मुख्य मंतर्ी सुǛी 
ममता बनजीर् क े आशीवार्द से खड़ा हूं।  मान्यवर, मȅ िजस जगह से आता हूं, वह जगह एक चाय 
बागान है एवं मȅ चाय बागान क े वकर् र का बेटा हूं।  बंगाल मȂ मुझे first
 time िकसी ने opportunity 
दी, तो माननीय मुख्य मंतर्ी ममता दीदी ने दी। सर, संिवधान को लेकर जो debates, discussi on 
हो रहा है, मȅ कई points को लेकर अपना वƪËय देना चाहता हूं। सरकार कानून बनाती है, नीित 
बनाती है, implement करती है, amendment करती है,  इनका effect भारत मȂ रहने वाली 140 
करोड़ आबादी क े ऊपर पड़ता है। Government ने health insurance  क े ऊपर GST लगाया। 
GST लगाने क े बाद middle class क े ऊपर िकतना Ģभाव पड़ा, यह Government को समझना 
चािहए। सर, िपछले तीन वषर् मȂ industrial secto
r क े िलए क ेवल 5.65 लाख करोड़ रुपय े ऋण 
माफ िकया गया।  अगर देखा जाए, तो यह क ृिष क्षेतर् की तुलना मȂ लगभग छह गुना से अिधक है।  
भारत क ृिष Ģधान देश है एवं गरीब क ृषकȗ क े िलए सोचना सरकार का काम है।  बेरोजगारी का 
क्या Îतर है,  यह सब जानते हȅ।  Graduate एवं post-graduate जो बच्चे हȅ, वे educat ion लेकर 
घर मȂ बैठे हȅ, लेिकन अभी तक सरकार ने नौकरी देने का काम नहीं िकया।  देश मȂ मिहलाओं को 
सबसे ज्यादा Îवािमत्व देने वाली Îटेट पिÌचम बंगाल है, MSME देने वाली state है।  पिÌच म 
बंगाल मȂ चार मȂ से एक MSME मिहला Îवािमत्व, इसका मतलब यह है िक बंगाल सरकार 
Ëयवसाय मȂ िवÌवास रखती है।  मान्यवर, महंगाई की क्या िÎथित  है, इसके  बारे मȂ सब जानते हȅ।  
October, 2024 मȂ food inflation 14  महीने क े उच्चतम Îतर 11 Ģितशत था, जबिक January, 
2024 से November, 2024  मȂ food inflation  8.11 Ģितशत रहा। Novem
ber मȂ सिÅजयȗ की 
inflation दर 29 Ģितशत रही एवं October मȂ 40 Ģितशत से अिधक जा चुकी है।  सर, 2011 क े 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
बाद से अभी तक जनगणना नहीं हुई है। आप सबको मालूम है िक federal structure से country 
चलती है, देश चलता है, लेिकन हर जगह पिÌचम बंगाल की उपेक्षा की जाती है, पिÌचम बंगाल क े 
fund को रोका जाता है…(समय की घंटी)… अगर सचेतन रूप  मȂ देखा जाए…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Con
clude, Prakashji.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक: जो fertilizer की demand 4.5 लाख टन थी, लेिकन क ेन्दर् सरकार ने  
2.23 लाख टन आवंटन िकया। इसके  चलते आलू की फसल मȂ बंगाल को बहुत Ģभाव पड़
ा।   जो 
िपछले वषर् का 12.6 िमिलयन  टन था, वह देश की सबसे अिधक उत्पादन को लेकर ऑलरेडी 
हमने क ेन्दर् सरकार को िचƻी भी दी है। …(Ëयवधान)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Prakashji, conclude now.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक: मान्यवर, GDP rate सबको मालूम है। …( समय की घंटी)… देश मȂ 
GDP का सबसे िनचला Îतर 5.2 परसȂट है। घरेलू liability 2013-14 मȂ  3
.19 थी, वह 2022-23 मȂ 
बढ़कर 5.78 हो गई। …(समय की घंटी)… …(Ëयवधान)…    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Prakashji, please conclude now.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक: GDP का रेट क्या है, यह सबको मालूम है। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी मन की बात 
तो करते हȅ, लेिकन Ģधान मंतर्ी जी गरीबȗ की बात क्यȗ नहीं सुनते हȅ।…(समय की घं
टी)… 
धन्यवाद।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  Now, Shri Subhasish Khuntia, four minutes.   
 
SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA (Odisha) :    H o n .  D e p u t y  C h a i r m a n ,  S i r ,  I  r i s e  t o d a y  
with immense pride and gratitude to celebrate the 75
th Year of our Constitution, a 
living document that has served as the ba ckbone of our democracy.  I pay my 
heartfelt tribute to the architects of the Indi an Constitution.  Sir, in reality, Odisha 
reflects a grave injustice to its people, an d the spirit of the Co nstitution is being 
undermined. 
 Odisha is home to 40 per cent Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe 
population and 54 per cent Other Backwa rd Classes population.  Despite these 
numbers, the OBC community has been systemat ically denied its rightful reservation 
in education.  Article 16(4) of the Constitu tion provides for reservation to backward 
classes, and the Central Educational Inst itutions Act of 2006 clearly mandates 
reservation for OBC students.  Yet, the Government has failed to implement this in 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
129

 
 
Odisha.  Moreover, the SC-ST population, which forms a signific ant 40 per cent in 
our State, is only receiving 20 per cent rese rvation in technical education admissions, 
far below what is continuously mandated.  This is blatant denial of justice, as 
enshrined in the Preamble, the soul of the Constitution.  Can we call this justice for 
the people of Odisha? 
 The Odisha Legislative Assembly has already passed a Bill to conduct Caste 
Census and to implement 27 per cent reserva tion for OBCs by increasing the overall 
reservation cap.  Yet, this Bill remains un implemented.  One of the primary excuses 
cited is the 50 per cent reservation cap set by the Supreme Court in the Indira 
Sawhney Judgment.  But, Odisha presents a special case.  Our SC-ST population is 
16 per cent higher than the national average.  This makes Odisha an exception—one 
that deserves to surpass this cap.  I urge  the Government to approach the Supreme 
Court and seek review of this cap in the context of Odisha’s unique demography. 
 Sir, the Constitution also mandates ta rgeted welfare policies for its citizens.  
But, how can such policies be created wh en we lack accurate data on caste 
demographics?  I strongly urge the Government to conduct a comprehensive caste 
census in the upcoming National Census.  Th is will help us design targeted policies 
that ensure true social justice. 
 Sir, Part XXI of the Constitution, from Articles 371 to 371J, provides special 
provisions to different States, recognizing their unique needs and challenges.  Odisha 
too has a peculiar geography.  It has abunda nt natural resources, but suffering with 
backwardness.  Our leader, Shri Naveen Patnaik, has repeatedly demanded for 
Special Status for Odisha.  This is not me rely a demand, but a legitimate necessity.  
Let us not forget, Odisha produces nearly 50 per cent of the nation’s minerals. Yet, 
our people are not receiving their fair share. क्या यही है सबका साथ-सबका िवकास? 
 Hon. Prime Minister often spoke abou t the vision of Purvodaya, a holistic 
development of Eastern India.  But I as k: How can Purvodaya  be achieved when 
Odisha—a land of immense potent ial—continues to be neglected? 'पूरब से करते हȅ 
वादे, पर पिǙम तक िसमट रहे इरादे।' क्या यही पूवȘदय है?
      Now that we have a double-
engine Government, I call upon the Centre to finally grant Odisha the Special Status.  
This will empower us to unlock our true potent ial and ensure inclusive growth for all.  
The State is also one of India’s most di saster prone regions. Cyclone, floods and 
droughts cause immense losses and hampered progress. (Time-bell rings.)  
 In conclusion, as we celebrate the 75
th Anniversary of our Constitution, let us 
not merely commemorate it, but renew our commitment to its ideals of Justice, 
Equality, and Welfare for All.  Let us ensure that no citizen of Odisha is denied their 
constitutional rights.  Let us uphold the spir it of the Constitution and work towards an 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Odisha—and an India—where social justice is  not just a promise but a living reality.  
Jay Jagannath! Bande Utkal Janani.     
                                         
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya; three minutes. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Thank you Deputy Chairman, Sir.  It is 
a privilege for me to take pa rt today, in the discussion on the glorious journey of 75 
years of adoption of Indian Constitution. Our Constitution is a strong foundation of our 
democratic republic. My party is a democratic party.  We believe in democracy and I 
s t r o n g l y  r i s e  h e r e  t o  s p e a k  o n  t h e  s u b j e c t  o n  b e h a l f  o f  m y  p a r t y ,  A s s a m  G a n a  
Parishad and my party President.  
Our Constitution is a collective and individual effort. Today, on behalf of my 
party and on behalf of myself, I pay tribute to the officials, Members of the Constituent 
Assembly, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Chairm an of the Constituent Assembly and 
Convener, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar for drafting a beautiful Constitution given to us. Sir, 
our Constitution is clear. Our Preamble is cl ear. Our Preamble is for justice, liberty 
and equality. Sir, from the depths of my heart, I have to say that this was not 
applicable at all to Assam under the lead ership of Congress.  India had one rule 
against foreign nationals. The Foreigners Act, 1946 is applicable for foreigners who 
stay in our country. But Congress adopted IMDT to protect Bangladeshis who are 
coming to Assam. To protect them, giving them voting rights, they amended the 
Constitution, but the hon. Supreme Court gave justice in favour of us and we, 
ultimately, got relief from the Supreme Co urt.  The Supreme Court rescued us and 
IMDT was scrapped by the Supreme Court. This is injustice done to us. I will give you 
another example. In the year 1983, all the political parties, people of Assam were 
against the imposition of election in A ssam in 1983. But the Congress Government 
forcefully conducted the elections. Thousa nds of people were killed during that 
election. Due to Congress, thousands of people were killed. They imposed the 
election.  Out of two lakh votes, one pers on got 17 vote only and he was elected 
as…(Time-Bell rings)… Sir, please give me some more time because I am speaking.. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : One minute. माननीय बैÌय जी, आप बड़े सीिनयर सदÎय हȅ। 
Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। I will just request you. यह समय क ै से तय होता है, इसे माननीय सदÎ
 य जानते 
हȅ। इसके  िलए हाउस क े रूÊस ऑफ Ģोसीजर है और रूÊस एंड कन्वȂशन है। यह समय मȅ तय नहीं 
करता हूँ। I am supposed to follow it.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
131

 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA:  Sir, I agree. I respect you. This should be 
applicable to everybody. ...(Interruptions)...This should be applicable to everybody, 
not one single person...(Interruptions)...I am speaking...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Time is decided by the formula which has been devised by 
the House. Please conclude. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: Sir, please give me some time.  You have given 
extra time to everybody.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA : Sir, I am coming to th e point. Please give me 
two extra minutes.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I request you to conclude within one minute. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: Thank you, Sir. Sir, I am  speaking this from my 
heart. Illegal election was imposed in Assam by the Congress.  I would like to say one 
thing. As per Indian Constitution, we are one nation, we must have one Constitution. 
Before Article 370 was revoked by the Pa rliament, India was one nation, not one 
Constitution because separate rule was a pplicable in Jammu and Kashmir. It is 
because of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Government, that by abolishing 
Article 370, we got justice and now India is  one nation, India is one Constitution. I 
must compliment…(Interruptions)… Madam, I am speaking from my heart. What I am 
speaking from my heart…(Interruptions)… Can you explain to me…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. …(Interruptions)…You have only nine 
seconds.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA : So this is the reason, I am standing here to 
support the glorious journey of 75 years of the Constitution. …(Time-Bell rings)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you. You have already spoken for two more 
minutes.  I am calling…(Interruptions)… 
 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA : I again pay respect to Ambedkar ji, Rajendra 
Prasadji and all the Members of the Constituent Assembly for drafting the Constitution 
very nicely. I salute my Constitution, although the Congress have defied the 
Constitution.                                 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now Shri Brij Lal. 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल (उǄर Ģदेश):  उपसभापित महोदय, संिवधान अंगीकृ त करने का यह 75वां साल 
है।  ऐसे ऐितहािसक अवसर पर आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देता हूं।  मȅ सबसे पहले संिवधान सभा क े सभी 379 सदÎयȗ को Ģणा
 म करता 
हूं, नमन करता हूं।  मȅ कांिÎटǷूशन डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े सभी सदÎयȗ और संिवधान क े मुख्य 
िशÊपी भारत रत्न बाबा साहेब डा. भीमराव अÇबेडक र जी को कोिट-कोिट नमन करता हूं।    
उपसभापित महोदय, अभी मȅ बड़े ध्यान से सुन सुन रहा था, हमारे िवपक्षी लोग खासकर कांगर्ेस 
पाटीर् ने अपने संबोधन मȂ बार-बार कहा िक उन्हȗने बाबा साहब को बहुत सÇमान िदया है।  उन्हȗने 
यह भी कहा उन्हȗने उनको कांिÎटǷूशन डर्ािंÄ
टग कमेटी का चेयरमैन बनाया।  उपसभापित 
महोदय, पंिडत नेहरू  तो अंगर्ेज िवǎान और एक जमर्न िवǎान को चाहते थे।  ये दो ऐसे थे, जो 
पैसा लेकर कांिÎटǷूशन िलखते थे।  उस समय महात्मा गांधी जी ने कहा िक जब हमारे पास डा. 
भीमराव अÇबेडकर जैसा इतना बड़ा िवǎान है, तो क्यȗ न उनको संिवध
ान सभा का अध्यक्ष बनाया 
जाए और तब उनके  हÎतक्षेप से बाबा साहेब कांिÎटǷूशन डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े चेयरमैन बने। 
महोदय, डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी मȂ सात सदÎय थे।   उनमȂ से एक की डेथ हो गई, दो लोग बीमार हो गए, 
एक िवदेश चले गए और क ु ल िमलाकर बाबा साहेब ने िंसगल हȅडेडली भा रत का संिवधान िलखा 
है।  मȅ अभी सुन रहा था िक टी.टी. क ृÍणमाचारी साहब ने जब उस पर दÎतखत करना शुरू  िकए, 
तब उन्हȗने बाबा साहेब क े इस रोल को सराहा िक मुख्य रोल बाबा साहेब डा. भीमराव अÇबेडकर 
का है।   
महोदय, अभी कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की तरफ बहुत क ु छ बोला गया।  बाबा साहेब ने 10 अक्टूबर, 
1951 को अपने इÎतीफे  पर जो भाषण िदया था, मȅ उसके  क ु छ अंश क्वोट कर रहा हूं, जो उनकी 
Ëयथा को Ëयƪ करेगा
।  वह क्वोट है:  "It is now 4 years, 1 mo nth and 26 days since I was 
called by the Prime Minister to accept the offi ce of Law Minister in his Cabinet.  The 
offer came as a great surprise to me.  I was in the opposite camp and had already 
been condemned as unworthy of associat ion when the interim Government was 
formed in August 1946.  I was left to sp eculate as to what could have happened to 
bring about this change in the attitude of the Prime Minist er.  I had my doubts.  I did 
not know how I could carry on with those wh o have never been my  friends.  I had 
doubts as to whether I could, as a Law Minister, maintain the standard of legal 
knowledge and acumen which had been main tained by those who had preceded me 
as Law Ministers of the Government of India."  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
133

 
 
उपसभापित महोदय, यह बाबा साहेब ने जो कहा, उनकी जो Ëयथा थी, वह जोगȂदर् नाथ 
मंडल क े Ģित थी।  जब 1946 मȂ कांिÎटǷूएंट असȂबली क े चुनाव हुए, तो बाबा साहेब बॉÇबे से 
चुनाव लड़े।  कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने सुिनिÌचत िकया िक बाबा साहेब को हराया जा ए और बाबा साहेब को 
हरा िदया गया।  जोगȂदर् नाथ मंडल जी उनको पूवीर् बंगाल ले गए, जो आज बांग्लादेश है।  वहां से 
खुलना जेसौर सीट से बाबा साहेब को िजताया गया।  बाबा साहेब कांिÎटǷूएंट असȂबली मȂ पहुंच 
गए।  महोदय, जब देश का बंटवारा हुआ - खुलना जेसौर सीट, जो असम क े बॉडर्र पर है, वह 
िंहदू बाहुÊय क्षेतर् था - उस समय कांगर्ेस मांग कर सकती थी िक इसको भारत को िद या जाए, 
लेिकन एक * क े तहत वह नहीं िदया गया और उनकी कांिÎटǷूएंसी पािकÎतान को दे दी गई 
और बाबा साहेब मेÇबर ऑफ पािकÎतान कांिÎटǷूएंट असȂबली बना िदए गए।  महोदय, यह * हुई 
थी।  उसके  बाद क ु छ पिरिÎथितयां ऐसी हुई और दबाव पड़ा, तब महाराÍटर् से एम. आर. जयकर 
की सीट खाली कराई गई और िफर बाबा साहेब चुनकर संिवधान सभा मȂ आए।  वे गांधी जी क े 
हÎतक्षेप से कांिÎटǷूशन डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े चेयरमैन बने।  यहां हमारे कांगर्ेसी भाई कह रहे थे 
िक यह तो हम
ने िकया और बाबा साहेब को सÇमान िदया, लेिकन इन्हȗने बाबा साहेब का अपमान 
करने का कोई मौका नहीं छोड़ा।   
 उसके  बाद मȅ जोगȂदर् नाथ मंडल जी क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहत ा हूं। जब देश का बंटवारा तय 
हुआ, तो जोगȂदर् नाथ मंडल जी ने, जो आज क े पिरĢेÑय मȂ भीम-मीम की राजनीित है, उन्हȗने 
कहा िक बाबा साहेब, हमारे दिलत Islamic country मȂ अच्छे रहȂगे, क्यȗिक जो आज क ु छ 
intellectuals कहते हȅ, मुसलमानȗ की भी आिर्थक-सामािज
क-शैिक्षक         हालत          वही          
है,        जो       हमारे       दिलतȗ     की है। वे बाबा साहेब की बात नहीं माने। वे पािकÎतान गए, 
िजन्ना ने उनको Law Minister and Labour Minister बनाया। बाबा साहेब क े रूप  मȂ यहां एक 
दिलत भारत का Law Minister बना और दूसरा दि
लत पािकÎतान का Law Minister बना। उसके  
बाद क्या हुआ! पािकÎतानी अपने एजȂडे पर आ गए।  जोगȂदर् नाथ मंडल जी की वजह से जो दिलत 
थे, वे पािकÎ तान  मȂ, खास कर पूवीर् पािकÎतान मȂ रुक  गए। लेिकन जब बंटवारा हो गया, तो जो 
सबसे ज्यादा कत्लेआम हुआ, उत्पीड़न हुआ, वह दिलतȗ का हुआ, वहां क े नमो शूदर् और मतुआ 
का हुआ। जब यह कत्लेआम होता रहा और Law Minister क े तौ र पर मंडल जी उसको नहीं रोक 
पाए, तो वे 3 वषर् 2 महीने मȂ भाग आए। एक देश का Law Minister भाग आया। वे कोलकाता मȂ 
आकर रहे और गुमनामी मȂ 5 अक्टूबर, 1968 को उनका देहांत हुआ। जब वे 8 अक्टूबर, 1950 को 
भागे, तो दिलतȗ मȂ भगदड़ मची। उनको असम मȂ, बंगाल मȂ बसाया गया। वे उǄर Ģदेश मȂ भी हȅ। मȅ 
1986 से 1988 क े बीच एक िजले, पीलीभीत का एसपी रहा हूं, जहां इस समय ढाई लाख दिलत 
बंगाली हȅ। उन की कांगर्ेस ने कोई सुध नहीं ली, उनको कोई अिधकार ĢाÃत नहीं था। लेिकन 2019 
मȂ जब CAA बना, तब जाकर उन दिलतȗ को भारत की नागिरकता िमली। िजतनी भी नागिरकता 
धािर्मक आधार पर Ģतािड़त पािकÎतान, अफगािनÎतान, बांग्लादेश, इन सब देशȗ क े लोगȗ को 
िमली है, उनमȂ 70 से 75 परसȂट नागिरकता उन दि
लतȗ को िमली है। उपसभापित महोदय, CAA 
का जो सबसे ज्यादा फायदा हुआ है, वह दिलतȗ को हुआ है। 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 िफर इन्हȗने कहा िक बाबा साहेब को हमने बनाया, िजससे वे दिलतȗ क े िलए क ु छ कर 
सकȂ, दिलतȗ की िहमायत कर सकȂ, क ु छ बना सकȂ, लेिकन बाबा साहेब का जो resignation 
letter है, उसमȂ एक और बात आती है, मȅ उसको पूरा पढ़ना नहीं चाहता। उसमȂ उन्हȗने कहा िक 
हमको कानून मंतर्ालय िदया गया, मेरे पास कोई Ģशासिनक पद नहीं था। बाबा साहेब चाहते थे 
िक उनको कोई Ģशासिनक पद िदया जाए, िज
स Ģशासिनक पद को पाकर वे क ु छ कर सकȂ, 
लेिकन उनको कोई Ģ शासिनक पद नहीं िदया गया। उन्हȗने कहा िक कई मंितर्यȗ को दो-दो, 
तीन-तीन मंतर्ालय िदए गए। कोई मंतर्ी अमेिरका चला गया, तो उसके  एवज मȂ दूसरे को दे िदया 
गया, लेिकन वे इंतजार करते रहे, उनको पद नहीं िदया ग या। पंिडत नेहरू  ने कहा िक हम 
आपको Ãलािंनग दȂगे। बहुत िदनȗ बाद तक तो Ãलािंनग बनी नहीं और जब Ãलािंनग बनी भी, तो 
उसमȂ बाबा साहेब का कहीं नाम नहीं था। उनको इस तरह से Ëयिथत िकया गया, defunct िकया 
गया, िजससे वे बहुत क ु छ कर न पाएँ। महोदय, अब बात आती है िक वे दिलतȗ क े िलए क ु छ 
करना चाहते थे, backwards क े िलए करना चाहते थे, लेिकन िकस तरह से पग-पग पर उनका 
िवरोध हुआ, पग-पग पर ऐसी पिरिÎथित create की गई िक वे क ु छ कर न पाएँ। बाबा सा हेब ने जो 
इÎतीफा िदया था, मȅ उसको पढ़ रहा हूं।  "The Prime Minister’s whole time and attention is 
devoted for the protection of the Muslims" -- उपसभापित  महोदय, यह बड़ा कड़वा शÅद 
है। -- "The Prime Minister’s whole time and a ttention is devoted for the protection of 
the Muslims.  I yield to none, not even to th e Prime Minister, in my desire to give the 
Muslims of India the utmost protection wherev er and whenever they stand in need of 
i t .   B u t  w h a t  I  w a n t  t o  k n o w  i s ,  a r e  the Muslims the only people who need 
protection?  Are the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Indian 
Christians not in need of protection?  What concern has he shown for these 
communities?  So far as I know, none and yet these are the communities which need 
far more care and attention than the Muslims." 
 महोदय, बाबा साहेब का यह कहना था िक पंिडत नेहरू  जी का क ेवल यह अटȂशन था - 
मुिÎलÇस और मुिÎलÇस।  यह बाबा साहेब की Ëयथा है। यह मȅ नहीं बोल रहा हूँ। उन्हȗने अपने 
भाषण मȂ कहा था। महोदय, उनके  इÎतीफे  का जो पतर् है, वह गायब हो गया है।  यह क ै से हो 
सकता है िक एक क ैिबनेट िमिनÎटर राÍटर्पित को इÎतीफा दे और वह गायब हो जाए?  मȅ सरकार 
से मांग करता हूँ िक इस पर एक जांच बैठनी चािह ए िक उनके  इÎतीफे  का वह पतर्, िजसमȂ बाबा 
साहेब ने क्या-क्या िलखा था, कहां है, क्यȗिक उससे इनका एक्सपोज़र होता। उन्हȗने भाषण मȂ तो 
यह कह िदया, लेिकन शायद िलिखत मȂ और बहुत क ु छ रहता है, इसि लए  इसकी जांच होनी 
चािहए। 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: महोदय, वह िरकॉडर् मȂ है।  वह िरकॉडर् मȂ है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़।  
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: अभी तो िफलहाल ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
135

 
 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: वह िरकॉडर् मȂ है।  ये गलत बोल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: अगर मȅ गलत बोल रहा हूँ, तो उसके  िलए मȅ अपनी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: वह िरकॉडर् मȂ है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी बृज ला
ल: आज तक राइट ट ू इनफॉरमेशन एक्ट क े तहत जो मांगा गया, वह नहीं िदया 
गया।...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, इसकी जांच करनी चािहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... जी, महोदय। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: क्यȗ 
* बोल रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: मȅ 
* नहीं बोल रहा हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... * आप लोग बोलते रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़।  आप लोग आपस मȂ बात नहीं करȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
* असंसदीय शÅद 
है।  Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: महोदय, अब मȅ उसी बात पर आता हूँ।  हमारे हरदीप पुरी जी बाबा साहेब का एक 
क्वोट कर चुक े हȅ।  वही तुÍटीकरण की राजनीित, जो कांगर्ेस करती रही है।   
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
आिर्टकल 370- महोदय, आिर्टकल 370 से दिलतȗ को क्या फायदा हुआ?  बाबा साहेब आिर्टकल 
370 नहीं चा
हते थे। बाबा साहेब शेख अÅदुÊला की बात मानने को तैयार नहीं थे।  उनका एक क्वोट 
है।  एक क्वोट हमारे हरदीप पुरी जी कर चुक े हȅ, मȅ दूसरा क्वोट कर रहा हूँ।  "You wish India 
should protect your borders; she should bu ilt roads in your area s; she should supply 
you food, grains and Kashmir should get equal status as India. But the Government 
of India should have only limited         powers       and        Indian       people       
should       have      no rights in Kashmir. To give consent to the proposal would be a 
treacherous thing against the interests of In dia and as a Law Minister of India, I will 
never do it. ” यह वह था, जो बाबा साहेब ने 370 क े बारे मȂ कहा था, लेिकन इन्हȗने 370 क ै से 
बनाया?  बाबा  साहेब की absence मȂ यह काम Ǜी एन. गोपालÎवामी अयंगर को िदया गया।  
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
 
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
...(Ëयवधान)... अयंगर साहब कभी कÌमीर मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी रह चुक े थे।  उन्हȗने उसे डर्ाÄट िकया 
और जो बाबा साहेब नहीं चाहते थे, वह हुआ।  इस तरह से आिर्टकल 370 और 35ए आया।  इनके  
बारे मȂ कहा गया था िक यह टȂपरेरी है, लेिकन वह लगातार चलता रहा।  उसका सबसे ज्यादा 
खािमयाज
ा दिलतȗ ने भुगता है।   
सभापित महोदय, 1957 की बात है।  बख्शी गुलाम मोहÇमद कÌमीर क े Ģाइम िमिनÎटर थे।  
वहाँ क े जो चीफ िमिनÎटर होते थे, वो वहाँ क े Ģा इम  िमिनÎटर कहलाते थे।  जब बख्शी गुलाम 
मोहÇमद ने Ģताप िंसह क ैरो साहब से बात की, जो िक पंजाब क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तब उन्हȗने कहा 
िक क ैरो साहब, हमारे यहां सफाई कमीर् नहीं हȅ, जो हमȂ चािहए, क्यȗिक हमारा कÌमीर Îवगर् से 
नकर् बनता जा रहा है।  सभापित महो
दय, उस समय Ģताप िंसह क ैरो साहब ने कहा िक आप 
उनके  साथ अच्छा Ëयवहार नहीं करȂगे, लेिकन जब उन्हȗने आÌवासन िदया, तो आÌवासन िमलने 
क े बाद गुरदासपुर और अमृतसर से 262 पिरवार वहाँ पर गए।  उनको वहाँ का परमानȂट रेिजडȂट 
सिर्टिफके ट देना चािहए था, लेिकन उनको परमानȂट रेिजडȂट सिर्टिफके ट नहीं िदया गया और 
वहाँ जो 35 ए लागू हुआ, उसके  तह
त यह Ģावधान था िक उनकी संति त, उनके  बच्चे, चाहे वे 
पीएचडी कर लȂ, लेिकन उनको क ेवल Îवीपर की, सफाईकमीर् की नौकरी ही िमलती थी। वे 
कÌमीर क े बाहर तो आईएएस/आईपीएस हो सकते थे, लेिकन कÌमीर क े कानून क े अनुसार वे 
वहाँ क ेवल सफाईकमीर् हो सकते थे।  इसिलए सब से ज्यादा अत्याचार तो इन्हȗने भुगता।   महोदय, 
उसके  बाद जब यह धारा 370 वहा ँ से हटी है, तब जाकर उनको न्याय िमला है।  आज भारत का 
कानून वहां लागू हुआ है।  नहीं तो वहां पर 'अलग संिवधान, अलग िनशान और अलग Ģध ान' का 
िसÎटम था।  उसी पर पंिडत Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् ने कहा था िक एक देश मȂ ' दो िनशान, दो 
Ģधान और दो िवधान' नहीं चलȂगे।  उसके  िलए मȅ नरȂदर् मोदी जी और अिमत शाह जी को साधुवाद 
देता हूँ िक यह जो कलंक थी, धारा 370, इसको उन्हȗने 2019 मȂ हटा िदया। इससे बाबा सा
हेब की 
आत्मा भी Ģसन्न हुई होगी, क्यȗिक वे जो नहीं चाहते थे, वह हुआ था और अब उसको हटाया गया।   
उन्हȗने आरक्षण क े बारे मȂ कहा। पंिडत नेहरू  ने 1961 मȂ िलखा था िक उन्हȂ आरक्षण पसंद नहीं है।  
यह सबको मालूम है, हालाँिक उसको अभी लीपा-पोती करने की कोिशश की गई। चि
लए, हम 
उसको छोड़ते हȅ। महोदय, एक अलीगढ़ मुिÎलम यूिनविर्सटी है, जो 1920 मȂ बनी थी और बीएचयू 
1916 मȂ बनी है।  दोनȗ का एक्ट एक है क ेवल िंहदू और मुिÎलम शÅद अलग है।  उस यूिन
विर्सटी ने 
आज तक दिलतȗ, बैकवड्सर् और अब सामान्य जाित को जो 10 परसȂट िरजवȃशन िद या जाता है, 
वह नहीं िदया।  मोहÇमद बाशा वसȃज यूिनयन ऑफ इंिडया मȂ 1967 का जजमȂट है, सुĢीम कोटर् क े 
सात जजेज़ बȂच ने कहा िक आपको िरजवȃशन देना पड़ेगा, लेिकन कांगर्ेस की * मȂ वहां पर 
आरक्षण नहीं िदया गया, जो संिवधान ĢदǄ अिधकार था।  यह चलता रहा।  उसके  बाद िमसेज 
गांधी पावर मȂ आती हȅ और उन्हȗने मुिÎलम को कहा िक हम आपको माइनॉिरटी इंिÎटǷूट का 
अिधकार दȂगे।  उन्हȗने 1981 मȂ अलीगढ़ मुिÎलम यूिनविर्सटी एक्ट बदल िदया।  आज बीएचयू 
िरजवȃशन देता है। माइनॉिरटी यूिनव
िर्सटी न होते हुए भी अलीगढ़ मुिÎलम यूिनविर्सटी दिलतȗ और 
बैकवड्सर् को आरक्षण नहीं देता है। एक तरफ मोदी जी कानून बनाकर धारा 370 हटाते हȅ, सीएए 
लाते हȅ। उसमȂ दिलत सबसे ज्यादा लाभािन्वत हो
ते हȅ।  िजतनी नागिरकता िमली है, उनमȂ 70 से 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
137

 
 
75 Ģितशत दिलत हȅ और कांगर्ेस कानून बनाकर दिलतȗ का हक छीनती है, उनका िरजवȃशन 
छीनती है।  
महोदय, इसके  बाद मोदी जी ने बाबा साहेब को सÇमान देने क े िलए 'पंच तीथर्' बनाया।  
'पंच तीथर्' जाने का मुझे भी मौका िमला।  मȅ संिवधान िदवस पर 26 तार ीख को मुंबई गया था, चैत्य 
भूिम गया था, दीक्षा भूिम गया था।  कांगर्ेस ने कभी क ु छ नहीं िकया। बाबा साहेब क े देहांत क े बाद 
इन्हȗने उनको भारत रत् न  देने की बात नहीं सोची।  इंिदरा जी ने खुद को भारत रत्न दे िदया, 
नेहरू  जी ने खुद ले िलया।   उसके  बाद जब बीजेपी क े समथर्न मȂ गवनर्मȂट आई, तब जाकर 1990 
मȂ 31 माच र् को बाबा साहेब को भारत रत्न िदया गया।  महोदय, उस समय आप भी थे।  मȅ इसके  
िलए आपको भी Ģणाम कर
ता हूँ। भारत रत्न तो दूर, सȂटर्ल हॉल मȂ जहां हम लोग बैठते हȅ, अब तो 
वह संिवधान सदन है, वहां बाबा साहेब की फोटो तक नहीं थी।  सेन्टर्ल हॉ ल मȂ बाबा साहेब की 
फोटो लगना इनको नागवार लगता था। जब सेन्टर्ल हॉल मȂ बाबा साहेब की फोटो लगने की बात 
आई, तब हमारे कांगर्ेसी भाई कहते थे िक दीवार पर जगह नहीं है, तो वीपी िंसह साहब ने कहा था 
िक िदल मȂ जगह रखो, बाकी जगह तो अपने आप बन जाएग
ी।  तब जाकर बीजेपी क े सपोटर् से 
सȂटर्ल हॉल मȂ बाबा साहेब का िचतर् लगाया गया।  
  महोदय, संिवधान बनाने मȂ बाबा साहेब का मुख्य रोल रहा। उसके  बाद जब मोदी जी 
गुजरात क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तो उन्हȗने बाबा साहेब को सÇमान देने क े िलए संिवधान िद
वस मनाने 
की शुरुआत  की।   यहां पर संिवधान िदवस नहीं मनाया जाता था।  जब मोदी जी 2014 मȂ Ģधान 
मंतर्ी बने, तो इन्हȗने 26 नवंबर 2015 से संिवधान िदवस मनाने की शुरुआत  की और तब से यह 
संिवधान िदवस मनाया जा रहा है।  यह बाबा साहेब को सबसे बड़ा सÇमान है। ...( समय की 
घं
टी)... बाबा साहेब की जो िनशािनयां थीं, जो बाबा साहब क े िवचार थे, ये उनको िमटाना चाहते 
हȅ।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ नेचर का बड़ा Ģेमी हूँ।  अगर आप िकसी डाल को काट दȂ, तो उसमȂ 
Îटर्ेस पैदा होता है।  जब Îटर्ेस पैदा होता है, तो उसक ी खाल क े नीचे जो बड्स रहती हȅ, वे तेजी से 
उगती हȅ।  उसमȂ बहुत तेजी से डािलयाँ िनकलती हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: थȅक यू, बृज लाल जी। 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल:  ये चाहे िजतना कर लȂ, लेिकन बाबा साहेब क े जो अनुयायी हȅ, उनकी संख्या 
लगातार बढ़ती जा रही है और बाबा साहेब का िव
चार पूरे दुिनया मȂ अमर रहेगा। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े 
साथ, मȅ अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूँ।...(समय की घं टी )... मȅ िफर संिवधान िनमार्ता बाबा साहेब 
को कोिट-कोिट नमन करता हूँ, जय िंहद, जय भारत!  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Kapil Sibal; ten minutes. 
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL (Uttar Pradesh):  Sir, I consider it a great privilege to participate in 
this debate as we celebrate 75 magnificent years of our Constitution.  And, while I 
respect the views of all the Members, dist inguished Members on both sides, I think 
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the time has come for us to start asking ourselves a question, which is fundamental to 
the future of India. And the question is th e following:  Has the Constitution failed us, 
or have we failed the Constitution?  This Constitution is a wonderful document. And 
while we all sit here, we are like stars in the political firmament.  But if you look at the 
sky today, it is polluted. You can't even see the stars. And I am worried about the 
pollution that has entered into our political fr amework. And it is because of our failing.  
I do not want to blame ‘A’ or ‘B’ for that, but we have failed collectively, because we 
have not been able to really generate the kind of confidence in the people of this 
country to salute those of our forefathers who dreamt for India and for whom we are 
here today, to realize their dreams. 
I will take just a few minutes and indicat e what the points are because I have 
only 10 minutes.  What did the Constitution framers say on the 26th of November, 1950 
when we, the people of India, gave to ours elves this Constitution? They said that in 
this country we must secure for all our citizens Justice, social, economic and political.  
You ask yourself the question. Have we been able to deliver social justice in this 
country? Have we been able to deliver ec onomic justice in this country? Have we 
been able to deliver political justice in th is country? Look at the disparities between 
the rich and poor in this co untry. One percent of the peop le of this country actually 
have more than 20 percent of the national income, of the entire national income. One 
percent of the people of this country own 40  to 50 percent of the wealth of this 
country. That is where we are. Have we failed the Constitution? We have. You may 
say whatever you want to say about your Governments and they  will say whatever 
they want to say when they were in power.  The question is not that.  Collectively, 
have we discharged the responsibilities that the forefathers, in fact, desired that we 
should do? And, I would give all of you just one sentence from Babasaheb 
Ambedkar, whom we talk about all the time. On November 4, this is what he said, 
and I quote: "It is perfectly possible to pe rvert the Constitution without changing its 
form by merely changing the form of the ad ministration and to make it inconsistent 
opposed to the spirit of the Constitution."  You can talk all about this Constitution. 
The question is:  How have you worked it? What have you delivered on the ground? 
You talk about political justice. What kind of  political justice is there in this country 
when elected Governments are thrown ou t through processes of money power and 
defection? What is the political justice that you are giving? Is there any example in the 
history of the world where elected Governments have been thrown out in this 
fashion? 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) in the Chair] 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
139

 
 
 
And, there are judgments after judgments of courts saying that it should not have 
been done. Whether it was this side or that side, they used Article 356 for the 
purposes of changing Governments. Has that ever happened anywhere in the world? 
Has anybody spoken when poor Dalits are lynched in daylig ht, when their videos are 
shown in the social media? Do the powers  that be say anything? They are silent. 
When civil war is going on in one part of  the country, has anybody spoken for them, 
for the women there? And then, we talk abou t social, economic, and political justice. 
We talk about liberty, liberty of faith, liberty of worship, liberty of thought and liberty of 
belief. Where is that liberty? I can say, in fact, there is no  liberty in Parliament. I will 
tell you why.  It is because you are bound by  your whip. What is this whip? This whip 
controls our conscience. If I belong to a po litical party, can I ev er speak against it? I 
cannot.  
 One, I will be ostracised. Two, I will not become a Minister. So, I keep on 
praising, whether this side or that side, because that is the way our constitutional 
democracy functions. There is nowhere in  the world where there is a whip in 
Parliament, other than in case of two excep tions, when the Government is going to 
fall when there is a No Confidence Motion  and when the Budget is going to be 
passed.  It is only on those two exceptions th at there is a whip in political democracy. 
But, have you heard of any democracy which says that you are bound by the Whip of 
the Party, which means you have no conscience? I have the right to speak in 
Parliament, but ‘No’. I have the right to say what I think about a particular Bill, but we 
are not entitled to speak. Is this how we  are working our Constitution? What liberty 
are we talking about when young students are in jail for four -and-a-half years and 
there is no choice of bail; when young girl s are incarcerated for three years, four 
years, for protesting? Is that  the liberty that our forefathers gave us -- Liberty of 
thought and of worship? What are we talking about?  If there is an interfaith marriage, 
you bring laws to say, ‘No; there will be an enquiry.’ I mean, what kind of laws are we 
bringing in? You can have any law in this country, but it can be misused. And what 
about your investigating agencies? Reme mber, no democracy can survive without 
institutions.  And what institutions do we have? We have only a few institutions. You 
have the institution of Parliament and I to ld you how it functions.  You have the 
institution of a Governor, the link between the State and the Centre. You know what 
the Governors do in this country. They have  become more political adversaries to the 
Government in power.  That is what the Governors are doing in this country. You have 
the institution of the Election Commission . We know what the Election Commission 
does in this country.  I wish there was a White Paper on the functioning of the Election 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Commission. I hope that when somebody else comes to power, we have to have a 
White Paper on how they have functioned. You adjourned the poll dates which were 
announced for polling; you adjourned it for a week and then you announced freebies. 
You talk about EVM.  I am not saying anyt hing for or against EVM. The fact of the 
matter is, forget the EVM, what the Electio n Commission does when they know that 
after six o'clock, the voting has increased by 8 per cent or by 9 per cent? The Election 
Commission has never explained it to the people of this country.  Previously, Election 
Commissioners used to give a Press briefing  at five o'clock saying how many votes 
have been polled; what is the percentage of votes polled; why votes are yet to be 
counted because they are coming from remote areas or there is a flood somewhere; 
postal ballots have not been counted, etc.  Those reasons were given. The Election 
Commission is not open with people in th is country anymore. So, what are you doing 
to institutions in our country? I am not blam ing you or them.  I am  saying, think about 
it. It is the survival of our future. Unless the institutions survive, you won't survive; we 
won't survive and this democracy won't survi ve. And yet, we celebrate it after 75 
years because we have survived.  No matte r what has happened, we have survived. 
But you have to think of what is going to happ en in the future if this continues. We are 
going to be in real trouble.  Then, the Co nstitution talks about equality of status and 
opportunity. A gentleman here talked about digital revolution that has come. I was the 
Minister of HRD. Just ask a poor child in a village in Bengal or a village in Uttar 
Pradesh, where is the digita l equality there? They don't have connections.  What are 
we talking about? ...(Interruptions)...Please allow me.  The fibre optic network has 
not been laid yet. 2,50,000 Gram Panchaya ts have to be connected with the fibre 
optic network.  They have not been conne cted yet. Where do you get Wi-Fi? People 
can't get lessons on mobile phones. Therefor e, there is huge digital inequality in this 
country. And who is, in fact, prospering? It  is the banks. The economic transactions 
are taking place through banks or the UPI. True , it is absolutely right. But the fact of 
the matter is, on the ground, 70 to 80 per cent of the people don't have the 
connectivity.  I launched a product called ‘A akash’. The reason was that if we could 
get connectivity to people in the classr oom, then a Maths teacher can teach 100,000 
people at the same time.  
 Now, think of the future.  India is not about one man.  India is about us. India is 
about the people of this country, and when  somebody starts addressing himself as 
the third person, then I know that democracy is in real danger.  ...(Time bell rings)... 
The last thing I want to say, and, I thin k, my time is almost over, is that the 
Constitution talks also about fraternity.  What does fraternity mean?  Fraternity 
ultimately, in Hindi language, means भाईचारा।  इसका मतलब यह है िक हममȂ आपस मȂ 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
141

 
 
कोई मतभेद नहीं होना चािहए।  चाहे हम िकसी भी धमर् क े हȗ, िकसी भी जमात क े हȗ, िकसी भी 
काÎट क े हȗ, कर्ीड क े हȗ।  अगर एक फ ैिमली भाईचारे क े िबना नहीं चल सकती, तो देश क ै से चल 
सकता है? आप जो मजीर् करवा लीिजए।  चाहे हिरयाणा  मȂ करवा लीिजए या कहीं और करवा 
लीिजए, उससे क ु छ नहीं होने वाला है।  जब तक आपके  देश मȂ peace नहीं होगा, तब तक िववाद 
रहȂगे और िव
वाद रहȂगे, तो देश कभी भी आगे नहीं बढ़ सकता है।     
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): धन्यवाद, आप समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL:  Please give me just two minutes.   I just want to say that we are 
now facing a real ch
allenge in the global community, and the challenge is the 
following:   Previously, the imperial powers  would capture us and exploit us.  Today, 
who is capturing us and exploiting us?  The global players of the world are doing this.  
They are capturing us because the kind of  information they ha ve about each of us, 
they will exploit that information to the full.   They will use algorithms to actually control 
us. They will control us.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):  धन्यवाद, आप समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL :  One minute, Sir.  And please think about artificial intelligence.  
This is the big danger to the fu ture.  It is a great opportunity, but it is also a danger to 
the future.  Now, your Government, forget about what you say here िक धारा 370 मȂ क्या 
हो गया।  हमने मुसलमानȗ क े िलए कर िदया, दिलतȗ क े िलए कर िदया।  आपने बहुत क ु छ िकया, 
लेिकन Äयूचर जेनरेशन पर तो ध्यान दीिजए िक आगे क्या होने वाला है।…(Ëयवधान)…   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ। क ृपया, आप बैठ जाएं। क ृपया, 
समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी किपल िसÅबल: आपकी जो उपलिÅधयां हȅ, उनसे क ु छ नहीं होने वाला है।  That is a matter of 
the past.   Please think of the future.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :   Now, Shri Vaiko.  You have 
seven minutes.  
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu) :   Sir, first of all, I would say that Article 356 of the 
Constitution, which is being misused by the Union Government for threatening the 
State Governments, should be deleted.  Th e Government is weaponising this Article 
to topple the elected Governments in the St ates.  Originally, when the Constitution 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
was adopted, the subjects, Education and Agriculture, were in the State List.  
Unfortunately, during the Emergency, they we re transferred to the Concurrent List.  I 
have moved a Private Member’s Bill for bringing these back to the State List.   
The greatest Justice, hon. Krishna Iyer, sa id on April 8, 1989, "If there is any 
constitutional institution hurrying to commit harakiri under the Indian sun, it is the 
office of Rajpal."   There are several pathological factors which feed the suicide 
appetite. The euphemism of the Constituti on, when operated by illiterates in the 
axioms of the Westminster culture, lends it self to horrendous di stortions which never 
happen if the wheels of the governance are steered by the edu cated and intrepid 
Governors who are aware of the relevant ar ts, acquire constitutional humility, and 
have a vision of the processes of democr acy, which empower them with wisdom to 
guide and courage to resist pressures from illicit quarters, particularly from the Union 
Executive.  No Governor or President ever  acts on his own.  He has no sure 
machinery to seek information or secu re advice, except the Department of 
Government.  Indeed, by virtue of his high office, he cannot walk into the streets and 
make enquiries.  He cannot demand from any source he fancies, materials necessary 
for deciding questions which may arise befo re him in his non-Governor capacity, and 
indeed, he may become the subject of serious criticism and constitutional 
misdemeanour if he gets enmeshed in  political controversy or litigative 
embarrassment through dubious consultation s of his own. The gu arantee of making 
the Governor a Chancellor is th at in the usual constitution al manner, he will seek and 
rely upon advice given to him by the Education or other relevant Ministry. 
 Whenever such questions ar ise in Government, the Governor’s power is only 
to act according to the advice of his Mi nisters and not investigate on his own and 
decide differently or indifferently.  But th at is happening in Tamil Nadu now by the 
Governor.  Independence of judgement is the first constitutional casualty of 
Governorship and in large measure, of the Presidency, except to direct 
reconsideration, seek effective informatio n from the Ministry.  The measure of the 
tyranny and treachery of the euphemistic text is gained from an instance.  Article 52 
declares that Supreme Command of the Defe nce Forces shall vest in the President.   
Can it be that the President, as th e Supreme Commander, order the Armies?   That 
will be naked dictatorship, demolishing democracy.   Similarly, literal construction 
leads to tyranny of meaning, and a Governor , or for that matter, President, may well 
become under the device of construction, a dangerous Caesar.  
Discarded and disgruntled politicians from the party in power in the Union, who 
cannot be accommodated elsewhere, get appointed.   Such persons, while in office, 
tend to function as agents of the Unio n Government, rather than as impartial 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
143

 
 
constitutional functionaries.  The numbe r of Governors who have displayed the 
qualities of ability, integrity, impartiality an d statesmanship, has been on the declining 
side.  These are the words of Babasaheb Ambedkar.   
Speaking in the Constituent Assembly on  the choice of Governors, Jawaharlal 
Nehru observed, "I think, it would be infi nitely better if he was not intimately 
connected with the local politics of the provin ce, and, would it not be better to have a 
more detached figure, obviously a figure that must be acceptable to the Government 
of the Province, and he must not be known to be a part of the party machine of that 
province.  But, on the whole, it probably woul d be desirable to have people from 
outside, eminent people, sometimes people who have not taken too great a part in 
politics. Politicians would probably like a more active domain for their activities but 
there may be eminent educationists, or persons eminent in other walks of life, who 
would naturally, while cooperating fully with the Government and carrying out the 
policy of the Government…" He further said , "It is obviously desirable that eminent 
leaders of minorities, eminent leaders of groups should have a chance, I think, will 
have a far better chance in the process of nomination than in the election."   This is 
from the Constituent Assembly Debates (R evised Edition) Vol. III, pages 455 and 
456.   
In order to ensure proper selection of Governors, we cannot do better than 
reiterate the criteria laid down in this regard by Jawaharlal Nehru.   As senior 
politicians are among those who are eligible for selection, it is desirable that a 
politician from the Ruling party in the Union is not appointed as Governor of a State, 
which is being run by some other party or a combination of other parties.  Any error in 
this respect can be pointed out by the Chief Minister during consultation at the pre-
appointment stage.   Regrettably, all these noble su ggestions have found their way 
into the waste paper basket at the PM's Secretariat. 
The Rajamannar Committee suggested that the Governor should be appointed 
always in consultation with the State Cabinet.  It further said that the Governor should 
be rendered ineligible for second term of of fice as Governor or fo r any other office of 
Government.  He should not be liable for remo val except proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after enquiry with the Supreme Court.   
With regard to the Centre-State relations, we have followed the British 
parliamentary system.  Cardinal principles of British parliamentary system were 
followed by our forefathers and in their wi sdom, when they evol ved the constitution, 
they followed the principle of First Past th e Post, whether he or she is the winner.  
That is the principle. I do not say that is the only perfect system.  (Time-bell rings)  I 
will take only two minutes.   But, this is the system we have adopted.  There are other 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
systems. In France, till they get more than fifty per cent, there will be another election.  
Even in the United States of America, alth ough a political party, whether Republican 
or Democrat, gets more votes in the States,  it cannot get the chair of the President 
because of the electoral college system.   I emphasize that let namaz be conducted in 
every mosque, right from the Himalayas down to Kanyakumari; prayers be conducted 
in every church throughout the length and breadth of the country; pujas be performed 
in all the temples; prayers to be held in all the Gurudwaras, Buddhvihars and Jain 
temples; and, the message of rationalism ma y also be spread by the torchbearers of 
rationalism without any hindrance and wi thout abetting anybody.  This is the nucleus 
of secularism.  
 Our Preamble reads, “We, the People of India, ha ving solemnly resolved to 
constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist Secular Democratic Republic and to secure 
to all its citizens: ”.   The zealots of Hindutva forces are bent upon demanding to 
remove two words, ‘socialism and secu larism’, from the Preamble in an 
undemocratic manner. I remember the words of Arignar Anna in Rajya Sabha made in 
1963.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : समाÃत कीिजए। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
SHRI VAIKO :  H e  s a i d ,  “I can never forget that I have got a hoary language called 
‘Tamil’.” (Time-bell rings)  “I will be never satisfied and I cannot be contained till that 
language in which my forefathers spoke, in which my poets have given sermons and 
scriptures...”  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : वाइको जी, Ãलीज़ समाÃत करȂ। ...(समय की घं
 टी)... 
 
SHRI VAIKO:  I am just concluding.  “ ... in which we have got classics and literature 
of inexhaustible knowledge, will find a due place as one of the official languages of the 
Union of India.”  The Government should set up a committee to study the feasibility of 
treating all the 22 languages included in the 8
th Schedule of the Constitution as Official 
Languages.  The Assembly has not only refrained from putting a seal of finality and 
infallibility upon this Constitution by deny ing to the people the right to amend the 
Constitution as in Canada or by making the amendment of the Cons titution subject to 
fulfillment of extraordinary terms and conditions as in America or Australia.  (Time-bell 
rings) 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
145

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन। माननीय सदÎय, समय समाÃत हो 
गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... एक िमनट मȂ समाÃत किरए। रामजी लाल जी, क ृपया बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI VAIKO:  It is not a federal Constitution.  It is neither federal nor unitary. Some 
call it quasi-federal.  I quote Carl J. Friedrich. “Generally speaking, it can be said that 
decentralization is indicated where func tional considerations are of primary 
importance whereas communal preoccupation demands a federal system.”      
                             
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): धन्यवाद। Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन, आपके  पास तीन िमनट हȅ।  
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन ( उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, भारत क े संिवधान क े 75वȂ वषर् मȂ 
संिवधान क े Ģित हमारी िकत
नी Ģितबǉता है, हम इस सदन मȂ इसे याद कर रहे हȅ।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, जो संिवधान को बन ाने वाले थे, सबसे पहले मȅ उन सभी लोगȗ को और 
िवशेष रूप  से डा. अÇबेडकर की Îमृित को Ģणाम करता हूँ। भारत क े संिवधान मȂ 5,000 साल से 
ज्यादा पुरानी परंपराओं तथा कानून को खत्म कर के , गुलामी और अÎपृÌयता को अपराध घोिषत 
िकया गया और देश क े लोगȗ को सÇमान और बराबरी का दजार् िमला। उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, जब इस 
देश का संिवधान बनने को था, तब पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी क ु छ नामȗ को लेकर महात्मा 
गाँधी जी क े पास गए। उस समय महात्मा गाँधी जी का मौन Ĩत था। उन्हȗने कई लोगȗ क े ना
म 
सुझाए, लेिकन महात्मा गाँधी जी ने एक िटक िकया और यह Îवीकार िकया िक संिवधान की 
मसौदा सिमित क े िलए कोई सबसे बेहतरीन Ëयिƪ हो सकता है, तो उसका नाम डा. अÇ बेडकर 
क े अलावा कोई दूसरा नहीं है। उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ आपके  माफर् त यह बताना चाहूँगा िक डा. 
अÇबेडकर ने िलखा था िक संिवधान िकतना भी अच्छा हो, यह िनिÌचत रूप  से बुरा ही होगा, यिद 
उसे लागू करने वाले लोग बुरे हȗ।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, 1857 से लेकर िंहदुÎतान की आजादी तक क ु छ लोगȗ का देश क े राÍटर्ीय 
आंदोलन मȂ कोई योगदान नहीं रहा। वे संिवधान की मूल भावना को भी नहीं जानते हȅ। मȅ आपके  
माफर् त यह िनवेदन करना चाहूँगा िक ये लोग सरदार पटेल को बहुत याद करते हȅ, लेिकन जब 
महात्मा गाँधी पर गोली चली थी, तब राÍटर्ीय Îवयंसेवक संघ पर Ģितबंध लग
ाने का काम सरदार 
पटेल ने िकया था। 
7.00 P.M. 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपसे एक िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक इनका आदशर् तो िहटलर है।  
गोलवलकर की जो िकताब है...(Ëयव
धान)... क्या बात है, आप मेरी बात सुिनए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
हां, आपका आदशर् िहटलर है, यह मȅ आपसे कह रहा हूं  ...(Ëय वधान)... उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह 
गोलवलकर की जो िकताब है - We or Our Nationhood Defined, इसमȂ िलखा है िक िंहदुÎतान 
क े सभी गैर िंहदुओं को िंहदू संÎकृ ित और भाषा अपनानी होगी। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया संिवधान पर बोलȂ।   
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन:  सर, उसके  पृÍठ 40 पर िलखा है ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ।  तीन िमनट का समय पूरा हो 
गया है। Ǜी समीरुल  इÎलाम। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन : सर, मुझे एक िमनट तो बोलने दीिजए। 
* 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  आपका समय समाÃत हो गया और मȅने दूसरा नाम पुकार 
िलया है।  आप बैठ जाइए।  आपकी बात अंिकत नहीं हो रही है। 
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM (West Bengal) :  
*"Sir, India is the largest democracy in the 
world. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on the 75th anniversary of the 
Constitution. At the beginning of the Consti tution, written on November 26, 1949, the 
words are 'We the People of India.' There is  a word in our constitution - democracy 
and this democracy is in question today.   According to the Economic Intelligence 
Unit, India's democracy score has fallen sharpl y in the last few years. The decline in 
democratic institutions and the crackdown on civil liberties are the reasons for this 
downfall. India's global ranking has fallen from 27 in 2014 to 46 in 2021.  The number 
of suspensions of opposition MPs has incr eased 13 times in the last five years. 
Despite allegations of sexual harassmen t, communal incitement, and security 
breaches, no BJP MP has been suspended in the last ten years. 
Baba Saheb Bhimrao Ambedkar wrote this Constitution with the main goal of realizing 
the demand for equal rights for all people; free from exploitation, discrimination and 
inequality. 
But, sometimes I feel whether we will be able to hold and maintain this 
Constitution, which is our pride and honour.  Our Parliament building is the sacred 
temple of the people, the mosque, the church, or the Gurudwara.  I would like to read 
Article 67 (b) which says, “A Vice-President may be remo ved from his office by a 
resolution of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the 
Council and agreed to by the House of the people. ”  ...(Interruptions)...If an attempt 
is made to suppress the opposition voi ce in this way within the Parliament 
and outside, the rights under the Constitution throughout the country will seem like a 
mirage to the common people. 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
147

 
 
Atrocities against religious minorities, tribals, Scheduled Castes, and 
indigenous people are increasing. The Adivas is are complaining for a long time that 
their religious code, Sarna Code is not being recognized. 
Recently, a High Court judge said that the country would run according to the will of 
the majority. Is this the law! It seems that a judge who is the protector of the 
Constitution, is talking like a separatist. Look at the planned violence in Sambhal, 
Uttar Pradesh, in the name of the Jama Masjid survey, and four minority youths were 
killed. This is the state of affairs in the country!  The Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh 
has raised a new slogan, instead of development - " Batenge to Katenge ." 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  क ृपया आप बैठ जाएं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... क ृपया बार-बार 
खड़े न हȗ, आपकी बात अंिकत नहीं होगी।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM :  In this way, the divisive polit ics is being played against the 
people. We must remember that the divisi ve politics never brings about improvement 
in any country. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप समाÃत करȂ।  
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM:  Slogan is "बँटȂगे, तो कटȂगे"।  ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप समाÃत करȂ।  आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ। 
...(Ëयवधान).
..   
 Ǜी िबकास रंजन भƺाचायर्। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप क ृपया 
शांत रहȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... िबकास रंजन भƺाचायर् 
जी, आप बोिलए।  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA (West Bengal) : Sir, my time may be 
started now.  
 Sir, we are discussing the glorious jo urney of the Indian Constitution.  The 
Constitution was adopted by the people of In dia. I just take this opportunity to quote 
from the deliberations made by Mr . Jaipal Singh, who is from the Adivasi community.  
Kindly see what he felt. He was also repr esenting there. He says that there are 
millions and hordes of people who have not h eard about it. He says that the history of 
Indus Valley Civilisation, a child of which I am, shows quite clearly that it is the 
newcomers -- most of you here are intruders as far as I am concerned -- who have 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
driven away my people from the Indus Valle y to the jungle fastnesses.  We are the 
most democratic people on earth. What my people require is not the safeguards of 
democracy, but we need the sustenance from the Constitution.  
Sir, the Constitution is not for the people who are sitting in this luxurious building; the 
Constitution is for the people who are on the streets, staying there without any shelter 
in this winter season.  What have we seen ? We have seen that, in the progress of the 
Constitution, there are many milestones. Up to 1970, we saw that the Indian 
Constitution gave us the economic protection of  nationalization of properties in favour 
of the country. Private properties were na tionalized which ultimately benefited the 
Indian economy towards the direction of economic democracy -- the foundation of 
the Constitution. Then, in 1975, we found a black spot. There was an Emergency 
declaration which was absolutely not in favo ur of the Constitution. Ultimately, that 
person came forward and apologized to the people saying that she had committed a 
mistake.  That chapter is over.  When we a rrived in 2014, we found that initially there 
were deviations. Now, there is a deliberate attempt to destroy the basic features of 
the Constitution.  When people see, as  I referred to Mr. Jaipal Singh and adivasis, 
they say that they don’t have any religion;  they believe in worshipping nature and 
environment. They say that and when they find that the hon. Prime Minister of the 
country goes to lay foundation-stone of a mandir of a particular religious community, 
that really hits the heart of the Constitution. ...(Interruptions)...Then starts the 
destruction of the constitutional principles. ...(Interruptions)... We, the Indian 
people, are people as a whole. ...(Interruptions)...We are known. 
...(Interruptions)...Sir, this sort of interruptions is going on. 
...(Interruptions)...Please don’t interrupt me. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप लोग क ृपया शांत रहȂ।  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA : The hon. Prime Minister of the country 
cannot. ...(Interruptions)...I have more time. I was interrupted. 
...(Interruptions)...The hon. Prime Minister of a democratic country having taken 
oath on the Constitution cannot go to an y temple to lay the foundation stone. 
...(Interruptions)...He cannot spend the public money. ...(Interruptions)...He 
cannot have the right...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ित
वाड़ी ): आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ǜी गोला 
बाबूराव। ...(Ëयवधान)... आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ, आप क ृपया बैठ जाएँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... No, 
no. ...(Interruptions)... आप Advocate General रहे हȅ, आप िबराजȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
149

 
 
बैिठए।...(Ëयवधान)... आपका समय समाÃत हो गया। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ǜी गोला बाबूराव - उपिÎथत 
नहीं।  Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला। 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला (राजÎथान): वाइस चेयरमैन साहब, आपका शुिकर्या। सर, अगर 
हम संिवधान क े 75 वषș की बात करȂ, तो उसके  िलए सब स े पहले यह जानना जरूरी  है िक 
संिवधान है क्या? क्या संिवधान एक िकताब का नाम है, क्या संिवधान पूजा जाने वाला एक गर्ंथ है 
या क्या संिवधान हाथी पर रखकर..  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): अगर हम संिवधान का संिध-िवच्छेद करȂ, तो यह 
सम+िवधान होता है, यान
ी - सबके  िलए एक-सा िवधान।  यह है – संिवधान। 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला : जी, सर।  आपने िबÊकु ल सही फरमाया।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : अब आप आगे बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाल
ा : परन्तु क्या संिवधान हाथी पर रखकर झांकी िनकालने वाला एक 
शाÎतर् है? ...(Ëयवधान)... सच्चाई यह है िक ...(Ëयवधान)... तो वाइस चेयरमैन सर, संिवधान 
है क्या? जैसा बाबा साहेब अंबेडकर ने संिवधान क े बारे मȂ कहा था - संिवधान तो समानता है, 
जैसा आपने भी कहा, यानी सबके  िलए बराबरी का अिधक
ार है; संिवधान तो आज़ादी है, यानी 
बोलने, सोचने, देखने, पहनने, खाने-पीने, धमर् मानने, िवरोध करने, असहमत होने और िवचार 
Ëयƪ करने की आजादी; संिवध ान  तो न्याय है, यानी छोटे-बड़े, ऊ ं चे-नीचे, अमीर और गरीब क े 
भेदभाव से ऊपर उठकर सबके  िलए बराबरी का दजार्; संिवधान तो भाईचारा है, जैसे मेरे एक और 
साथी ने कहा।  यानी धमर् और जाित की नफरतȗ और िवभ ाजनȗ से ऊपर उठकर Ģेम, सǌाव, 
सदाचार और समान िवधान का नाम संिवधान है। 
महोदय, संिवधान क े 74 सालȗ पर चचार् क े िलए संिवधान क े मायने जानना जरूरी है, 
क्यȗिक सǄा क े हीरȗ का मुक ु ट पहना बादशाह आज संिवधान क े मायने भूल बैठा है।  
...(Ëयवध
ान)... सǄा क े िंसहासन और बड़ी-बड़ी क ुिर्सयȗ पर बैठे लोगȗ को आज की तारीख मȂ यह 
जानने की जरूरत है िक संिवधान क े मायने क्या हȅ।  मȅ अपने शÅदȗ मȂ उन्हȂ चिरताथर् करने की 
कोिशश करूं गा। वे राज क े तंतर्, यान
ी सǄा हिथयाने और सरकार बनाने को संिवधान मान बैठे हȅ, 
परन्तु देश क े िलए गरीबȗ की मुसीबतȗ और जनता की जरूरतȗ क े आगे सǄा की जवाबदेही क े 
Ģजातंतर् को संिवधान कहते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  परन्तु देश क े िलए गरीबी हटाना, न्याय 
करवाना और सबको बराबरी का दजार् िदलवाना, संिवधान है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ित
वाड़ी): आप क ृपया इनकी बात सुनȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... क ृपया 
इनकी बात सुनȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: वे टीवी पर सुिर्खयाँ बनाने वाली, ज़ोर-ज़ोर से बोलती आवाजȗ को 
संिवधान मान बैठे हȅ, परन्तु देश क े िलए टीवी क े Ģायोिजत शोर की बजाय वीणा की टंकार-सी 
बजने वाली आम आदमी की आत्मा की आवाज संिवधान है।  वे ईडी, सीबीआई और इन कम टैक्स 
क े डंडा-तंतर् से िवरोिधयȗ को झुकाने और सरकारȗ को िगराने को संिवधान मान बैठे हȅ, 
...(Ëयवधान)...  परन्तु वाइस चेयरमैन सर, देश क े िलए नैितकता, बहुमत और ईम ानदारी की 
कसौटी पर सǄा और शासन का खरा उतरना ही संिवधान है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  परन्तु देश क े 
िलए जूती गाँठने वाले गरीब, बोझा ढोने वाले क ुली, मोटर िरपेयर करने वाले िमÎतर्ी, टर्क चलाने 
वाले डर्ाइवर, अनाज पैदा करने वाले िकसान की आवाज को बुलंद करना ही संिवध ान  है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : क ृपया आप लोग शान्त रहȂ।   ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: सर, वे साधु का छǍ वेष धारण कर अहंकारी ताक
त  क े नशे मȂ 
मयार्दाओं की लÑमण रेखा को क ुचल देने को संिवधान मान बैठे हȅ, परन्तु देश क े िलए तो पक्षीराज 
जटायु की तरह न्याय व कतर्Ëय क े बोध क े िलए क ुबार्नी देना ही संिवधान है।   
 आजकल संिव
धान क े नाम पर बड़े-बड़े लोगȗ ǎारा भारतीय राÍटर्ीय कांगर्ेस को गाली देना 
और लांछन लगाना फ ैशनेबल हो गया है। काश! ये सब लोग कांगर्ेस को पानी पी-पीकर कोसने की 
बजाय बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर ǎारा 25 नव ंबर, 1949 क े भाषण को पढ़ लेते, जो उन्हȗने 
संिवधान क े एडॉÃशन से ठीक एक िदन पहले िदया था।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने भी उसकी चचार् की थी।  
And I quot
e, अÇबेडकर जी ने कहा, " िवधानसभा क े अंदर कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की मौजूदगी से 
अराजकता की यह संभावना शून्य हो गई, िजसने इसकी कायर्वाही मȂ Ëय
वÎथा और अनुशासन की 
भावना लाई।  कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े अनुशासन की वजह से ही मसौदा सिमित संिवधान को िवधानसभा 
मȂ पेश करने मȂ सक्षम हुई।  िजसमȂ Ģत्येक अनुच्छेद और Ģत्येक संशोधन क े भाग्य क े बारे मȂ 
िनिÌचत ज
ानकारी थी।  बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर आगे कहते हȅ, इसीिलए िवधानसभा मȂ संिवधान क े 
मसौदे को सुचारू  रूप  से चलने का सारा Ǜेय कांगर्ेस पाटीर् को जाता है।" यह थे बाबा साहेब 
अÇबेडकर।  सर, मȅ बहुत लंबी त
करीर नहीं करूं गा। बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने 25 नवंबर, 1949 क े 
संिवधान सभा क े संबोधन मȂ तीन िंचताओं की चचार् की।  मुझे लग ता है िक वे िंचताएं आज क े शोर 
मचाते शासकȗ और सरकारȗ पर लागू होती हȅ।  अंबेडकर जी की पहली िंचता - धमर् से ऊपर देश 
रखȂगे या धमर् को देश से ऊपर।  And I quote, अÇबेडकर जी ने कहा, "यह िंचता इस तथ्य क े 
एहसास से और भी बढ़ जाती है िक जाित और धमर् क े रूप  मȂ हमारे पुराने शतर्ुओं क े अला
वा हमारे 
पास कई राजनीितक दल हȗगे, िजनके  राजनीितक धमर् अलग-अलग और िवरोधी हȗगे।  क्या 
भारतीय देश को अपने धमर् से ऊपर रखȂगे या धमर् को देश से ऊपर रखȂगे, लेिकन इत ना तो तय है 
िक अगर दल धमर् को देश से ऊपर रखȂगे, तो हमारी Îवतंतर्ता दूसरी बार खतरे मȂ पड़ जाएगी 
और शायद हमेशा क े िलए खो जाएग
ी।"...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): सुरजेवाला जी...(Ëयवधान)... एक िमनट 
Ãलीज।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
151

 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला : सर, मेरा समय pause कर दीिजए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपका समय है।  पुराने भवन यानी संिवधान सदन मȂ 
चेयरमैन और Îपीकर, दोनȗ क े आसन क े पीछे िलखा हुआ है - ' धमर्चकर् Ģवतर्नाय'।  यह तो 
आपके  समय मȂ िलखा गया है। 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवा
ला : सर , मȅ तो बाबा साहेब की Îपीच लेकर आया हूँ।  आप कहȂ तो मȅ 
इसको Äलोर पर रख देता हूँ,  authenticate कर देता हूँ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): नहीं, नहीं, आप अपनी Îपीच चालू रखȂ। 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवा
ला : सर, आज देश मȂ क्या हो रहा है? क्या आज संिवधान और देश को 
दरिकनार कर क ेवल सǄा क े िलए सांĢदाियक झगड़ȗ और नफरत की आग मȂ नहीं झȗका जा रहा 
है?  सǄा क े शहतीरȗ पर बैठे मुिखया जब Ìम
शान बनाम किĤÎतान की बात करे, जब मटन, 
मंगलसूतर् और * की बात करे, उसे अपना चेहरा बनाए, जब लोगȗ को कपड़ȗ और टोपी से 
पहचाने, जब बच्चȗ की संख्या की िगनती से देश की नीितयां चलवाए, जब दीपावली, रमजान 
और िकर्समस का टकराव करवाए, तो िफर बताइए िक क्या बाबा साहेब की चेतावनी से सीख लेने 
की जरूरत नहीं है?  अÇबेडकर जी की दूसरी िंच
ता थी -  राजनीित मȂ भिƪ या नायक पूजा 
िनिÌचत रूप  से पतन और तानाशाही का मागर् है।...(Ëयवधान)...  मुझे मालूम है िक वे शोर से 
सत्य को परािजत करने की कोिशश करȂगे, पर वे इसमȂ कामयाब नहीं होने वाले हȅ।  25 नवंबर, 
1950 को अÇबेडकर जी ने िफर कहा, and I quote, " यह सावधानी भ
ारत क े मामले मȂ िकसी भी 
अन्य देश की तुलना मȂ कहीं अिधक आवÌयक है, क्यȗिक भारत मȂ भिƪ या िजसे भिƪ का मागर् या 
नायक पूजा कहा जा सक
ता है, उसकी राजनीित मȂ एक ऐसी भूिमका होती है, जो दुिनया क े 
िकसी भी अन्य देश की राजनीित मȂ िनभाई जाने वाली भूिमका से बेजोड़ है।  धमर् मȂ भिƪ आत्मा की 
मुिƪ का मागर् हो सकती है, लेिकन राजनीित मȂ भिƪ या नायक पूजा िन
िÌचत रूप  से पतन और 
अंततः  तानाशाही का मागर् है।"...(Ëयवधान)...    
 एक Ëयिƪ ने कहा, िकसान को लागत पर 50 Ģितशत मुनाफा िमलेगा, 2022 तक िकसानȗ 
की आय दोगुनी हो जाएगी।  नतीजा क्या हुआ? ...(समय की घं
टी)... उÊटा, सरकार बनते ही 
उिचत मुआवजा कानून को खत्म करने की कोिशश की, िफर िकसान िवरोधी काले कानून लाए, 
700 िकसानȗ की शहादत हुई और आज भी िकसान िदÊली आने क े िलए िससक रहा है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : अब आप दो िमनट मȂ समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: सर, दो िमनट।  एक Ëयिƪ ने कहा िक नोटबंदी लाऊं गा, कालाधन, 
नकली नोट और उगर्वाद 50 िदन मȂ खत्म करवाऊं गा।  काला धन तो खत्म हुआ नहीं, नकली नोट 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
तो खत्म हुए नहीं, उगर्वाद-नक्सलवाद तो खत्म हुआ नहीं, अथर्ËयवÎथा खत्म हो गई।  एक Ëयिƪ 
ने कोरोना मȂ बगैर सोचे-समझे लॉकडाउन लगाया और कहा िक ताली बजाओ, मोबाइल की 
लाइट जलाओ, कोरोना जादू से खत्म!  कोरोना तो खत्म हुआ नहीं, गंगा मैया लाशȗ से अट गईं।  
लाखȗ लोग हजारȗ िकलोमीटर पैदल चलकर गए और लाखȗ रोजगार खत्म हो गए।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : अब आप खत्म कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवा
ला: सर, अब मȅ खत्म कर रहा हूँ।  एक Ëयिƪ ने कहा िक रात को 12 बजे 
संसद मȂ घंटी बजाओ, जीएसटी लाओ और अथर्ËयवÎथा आगे लेकर जाओ।  जीएसटी आम 
Ëयवसायी क े िलए गÅबर िंसह टैक्स बन गया और सरकारी वसूली का ...(Ëयव
धान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): मेरा नाम घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी, यानी जीएसटी है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: सर, अब मȅ एक िमनट मȂ तीसरी िंचता की चचार् करूं गा।  अÇबेडकर 
जी की तीसरी िंचता थी - आिर्थक और सामािजक असमानता राजनीितक लोकतंतर् क े िलए खतरा 
है।  सर, एक िमनट।   25 नवंबर को अÇबेडकर जी ने जो कहा उसको मȅ यहां क्वोट करता हूँ।  
उन्हȗने कहा,  "हमȂ इस तथ्य को Î
वीकार करके  शुरुआत  करनी चािहए िक भारतीय समाज मȂ दो 
चीजȗ का पूणर् अभाव है।  इनमȂ से एक समानता है।  सामािजक धरातल पर भारत मȂ एक ऐसा 
समाज है, जो कर्ि
मक असमानता क े िसǉांत पर आधािरत है।  आिर्थक धरातल पर हमारे पास ऐसा 
समाज है, िजसमȂ क ु छ लोगȗ क े पास अपार संपिǄ है, जबिक कई लोग गरीबी मȂ रहते हȅ।  हम कब 
तक इसे नकारते रहȂगे? यह राजनीितक लोकतंतर् को खतरे मȂ डाल देगा।"...(समय की घं टी)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): अब आप खत्म कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: सर, अब मȅ अपनी बात समाÃत कर रहा हूँ।   मȅ आपके  संज्ञान मȂ 
लाता हूँ िक 140 करोड़ क े देश मȂ आज एक Ģि
 तशत लोगȗ क े पास देश की 40 Ģितशत संपिǄ है। 
हम एक बार िफर अंगर्ेजȗ की आिर्थक असमानता मȂ पहुंच गए हȅ। िकसान तो 27 रुपया Ģितिदन 
कमाता है, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): अब आपका समय समाÃत हुआ। 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवा
ला: यिद संिवधान को सशƪ बनाना है, तो बाबा साहेब की इन तीनȗ 
िंचताओं पर जरूर  गौर करना पड़ेगा, तभी संिवधान सशƪ हो पाएगा, क्यȗिक लोग भी यही कह 
रहे हȅ। ...(Ëय वधान )...  
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
153

 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अपनी बात बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर क े एक 
क्वोट से शुरू  करना चाहता हूँ।  बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने कहा था िक िकसी भी संिवधान का 
अच्छा या बुरा होना इस बात पर िनभर्र करता है िक उसे लागू करने वा ले लोग क ै से हȅ।  अगर वे 
अच्छे नहीं हȅ, तो अच्छा संिवधान भी बुरा सािबत होगा।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारे देश मȂ रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान, यह अिधकार सबको िदया 
गया है और ये तीनȗ चीजȂ सबको िमल नी चािहए।  पीडीएस क े तहत हमारे यहां लोगȗ क े पास हर 
महीने जो चावल पहुंचता है, जो राशन पहुंचता है, अगर उसमȂ क ु छ िदक्कत आए तो क्या समÎया 
आती है, वह मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूँ।  मȅ ओिडशा से हूँ।  वहां क े आिदवासी बहुल िजले 
फ ूलबानी मȂ तीन महीने से राशन नहीं पहुंचा है।  जब वहां क े लोगȗ ने आम की गुठली को क ूटकर 
अनाज बनाकर खाया, तो उससे िरएक्शन हुआ और तीन लोगȗ की जा नȂ चली गईं।  इसका 
िजÇमेदार कौन होगा? इसकी िजÇमेदार सरकार होगी या बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर का संिवधान 
होगा?   
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय ,ओिडशा मȂ  24 सालȗ तक नवीन पटनायक जी की सरकार रही और 
एक िदन भी ठीक टाइम पर चावल नहीं पहुंचने का कहीं से भी allegation नहीं आया, लेिकन 
पहली बार ऐसा हुआ है।  हमारे संिव
धान मȂ delay in justice क े िलए क्या सुिवधा है?  बाबा साहेब 
ने तो हमको सारे अिधकार िदए हȅ, िफर जिÎटस मȂ िडले क्यȗ हो रहा है? 
 लोगȗ को न्याय िमलने मȂ इतना िवलÇब क्यȗ हो रहा है? उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, अभी एक 
घटना घटी है, िजसमȂ एक युवा इंजीिनयर ने आत्महत्या कर ली, क्यȗिक अदालत मȂ दौड़-दौ
ड़ 
कर उसकी हालत बुरी हो गई, लेिकन उसको न्याय नहीं िमला। िजन्हȗने उसकी व ीिडयो  देखी 
होगी, वे ही जान सकते हȅ िक उसकी क्या हालत हुई थी। उसका नाम अतुल सुभाष था।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, संिवधान क े आिर्टकल 14, 15 और 21 मȂ जाित, धमर्, िंलग और भाषा मȂ 
भेदभाव न करने का अिधकार बाबा साहेब डा. भीमराव अÇबेडकर जी ने िदया है। महोदय, ऐसा 
क्यȗ हो रहा है िक वातावरण ठीक नहीं है। हाथरस जैसी घटना घट रही है, मिणपुर मȂ समÎया है, 
देश क े कई भागȗ मȂ समÎया है, लोगȗ क े िदल मȂ डर बैठ गया है। संिवधान हमको अिधक ार देता है, 
सब धमर् क े लोगȗ को, सभी वगर् क े लोगȗ को अिधकार देता है, तो हम आज क ु छ भी बोलने से डरते 
क्यȗ हȅ, इसमȂ क्या समÎया है? मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार को बताना चाहता हूं, सरकार से 
अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर क े संिवधान क े मुतािबक सबक
ो समान 
अिधकार िदया जाए, सबको समान हक िदया जाए। िजसने भी भारत मȂ जन्म िलया है, जो भी 
भारतवासी है, सब धमर् और सब वगर् क े लोगȗ को सम ान हक देना चािहए।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आंधर् Ģदेश मȂ पोलावरम Ģोजेक्ट चल रहा है। छǄीसगढ़ सरकार, 
ओिडशा सरकार – सुĢीम कोटर् तक क े स चला गया है। मȅ अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक हमारी 
संघीय ËयवÎथा मȂ हमारी क Ȃ दर् सरकार को इंटरफे यर करना चािहए। इन दोनȗ सरक
ारȗ को 
बुलाकर discussion करना चािहए और समाधान का राÎता िनकालना चािहए। इसिलए िक एक 
मलकानिगरी िजला है, जो आिदवासी बाहुÊय है, वहां 90 परस Ȃट आिदवासी रहते हȅ। अगर 
पोलावरम Ģोजेक्ट की हाइट ज्यादा बढ़ गई तो, उस िजले का एक तहसील और एक Åलॉ
क पूरा 
ड ू ब जाएगा। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार से अनुरोध करूं गा िक वहां आिदवािसयȗ को न्याय 
िदया जाए। पोलावरम Ģोजेक्ट की हाइट कम करने क े बारे मȂ सोचा जाए और तीनȗ राज्य सरकारȗ 
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
से बातचीत करके  क ु छ हल िनकाला जाए। मȅ बस एक बात और कहूंगा िक िकतनी भी परेशानी 
क्यȗ न हो िज़न्दगी मȂ, हमȂ हमेशा अपने अंदर आशा की िकरण जलाए रखनी चािहए। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :  Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai; 
you have seven minutes to speak. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :   Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, as I rise to speak 
on behalf of AIADMK and my  leader, Edappadi K. Palaniswami, on the 75th years of 
our Indian Constitution, my heart overflow s with gratitude to Dr. Ambedkar.  Dr. 
Ambedkar has given us the Constitution, whic h is a historical document, rewriting the 
lives of Indian people.  What was forced on us by birth was erased by law and a new 
life was offered by the Constitution to the millions of the people who were born in this 
country.  For example, a humble farmer's son like me, from a remote village, 
Chinthagampalli of Krishnagiri District in Tamil Nadu, became Law Minister of this 
country, a glorious portfolio held by Dr. Ambe dkar himself.  It was offered to me by 
my leader, Amma Jayalalitha.  During the Vajpayee ji period, I was Law Minister.
   
Indeed, social justice is the sole objective of the Dravidian Party.  So, AIADMK Party 
leader, Puratchi Thalaivi MGR, made 69 per cent reservation for the OBC and SC 
people.  And, Puratchi Thalaivi Amma, had in cluded it in the Ninth Schedule to this 
Constitution,.  Sir, our l eader, Edappadi K. Palanisw ami, recently requested, 
demanding the DMK Government, to take up caste-based census in Tamil Nadu.  
Whether the DMK will conduct the caste-based Census, we don't know.  But we are 
demanding that.  Sir, when the Women's Reservation Bill was intr oduced in 1990, I 
was Law Minister in the Vajpayee Governme nt.  I introduced the Bill for women’s 
reservation.  It was a historical event.  I can  never forget that.  But it is a dream now.  
The Modi Government has fulfille d the aspiration which Vajpayee ji imagined.  And, I 
introduced the Bill.  It was a great privile ge to me, my AIADMK party, my leader, 
Madam Jayalalitha, who dreamt it duri ng Vajpayee period.   It is Modiji who fulfilled it 
now.  
 Because of that, there have been two women Chief Ministers in Tamil Nadu.  
And,  I am proud to say that both of them  belong to the AIADMK party. My leader, 
Edappadi Palaniswami, the General Secret ary of AIADMK, celeb rated the centenary 
of the first woman Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Shrimati Janaki Ramachandran. But, 
the DMK Government has not honoured that celebration.  This is really a matter of 
shame. ...(Interruptions)...No; no. I am telling that this was because of the women's 
reservation that there have been two wome n Chief Ministers in Tamil Nadu.  And, 
there was a centennial celebration of the fi rst woman Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu.  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
155

 
 
But, the DMK Government failed to celebrate that. They have just paid their lip service 
in the name of women’s reservation.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Sir, our friend from the DMK spok e about the federal nature of the 
Constitution. They had been a part of the Central Government for about 18 years. In 
1976, during the Emergency period, ‘Educat ion’ was made a Concurrent Subject by 
the then Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi.  Earlier, it used to be a State Subject. 
What did the DMK Government do for eighteen years?  Did they make any efforts to 
bring back ‘education’ under the State List? It is a matter of shame to just pay lip 
service. They are saying that they are going to stop the NEET Examination. Since the 
time the then Prime Minister, Shrimati In dira Gandhi, had brought ‘Education’ under 
the Concurrent List during the Emergenc y period, the people of Tamil Nadu are 
suffering.  But, the DMK Government did not fulfill its promise by bringing back 
‘Education’ under the State List.  
Sir, now, I come to the issue of Katcha theevu. It is a very important issue.  I 
want to raise this.  In 1976, the DMK and Congress were in power.  Katchatheevu was 
just given to Sri Lanka without the approval of the Parliament!  ...(Interruptions)...In 
the recent elections, Modiji promised that  he was going get back Katchatheevu once 
again. The DMK and the Congress pay only lip service to the people of Tamil Nadu.  
Ever since Katchatheevu has been given to Sri Lank, the fishermen  of  Tamil Nadu 
are suffering a lot.   
 Now, I come to language issue.  We are for all the languages of this country.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): क ृपया बैठ जाइए।  क ृपया समाÃत करȂ।  Ãलीज़, समाÃत 
कीिजए। 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI :   The languages in the Eighth Schedule including Malyalam, 
Telugu, Punjabi, Assamese, all of them should be declared as national languages of 
the country.  ...(Interruptions)...Not only  Tamil, Malaya lam, Telugu, Punjabi, 
Assamese, all the languages that are there in  the Eighth Schedule, must be declared 
as national languages of the country.  Ou r hon. Prime Minister has always been 
praising all the cultures and other things of the country. ...(Interruptions)...We are 
celebrating 75
th year of our Constitution’s adop tion.  Ours is a co-operative 
federalism.  But, DMK is not for that. They  pay just lip service. The Congress spoiled 
the whole concept of cooperative federalism.   But, at least, the present Government, 
Modiji’s Government, has promised to ho nour cooperative federalism.  Modi ji had 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
himself served as a Chief Minister of Gujarat.   He knows the aspirations of the States.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): क ृपया समाÃत करȂ।   
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI :  Now, I come to the issue of  mine auctions.   While 
auctioning tungsten, they violated norms.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : क ृपया समाÃत करȂ।   
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  The Central Government wants that all the income should go 
to the State Government.  But they are sp reading wrong information.  The Central 
Government has not taken away this power.  It is still with the State Government.  
But, just to hide their corrupt practices, they are blaming the Central Government.  
That is why recently our leader, Edappadi  Palaniswami, exposed the DMK corruption 
in the auctioning of mines.  ...(Interruptions)...It is a corrupt Government in the 
State.  Thank you, Sir, for having given me this opportunity to speak here.  
 
डा .सुधांशु ितर्वेदी  (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आज का भाषण Ģारंभ वहाँ 
से करना चाहूंगा, जहाँ से माननीय नेता Ģितपक्ष ने शुरुआत  की है। आज 16 िदस ंबर है और आज 
का िदन भारत की ऐितहािसक िवज
य का वह िदन है, िजसके  िलए मȅ Îमरण करना चाहूंगा उन 
सभी पातर्ȗ को, िजन्हȗने 1971 की ऐितहािसक िवजय मȂ बड़ी महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाई है। चाहे 
ढाका मȂ paratroopers को lead करने वाले जनर
ल जे.जे.जैकब हȗ, Chief of the Eastern 
Command, General Jagjit Singh Arora हȗ, उस समय भारत क े आमीर् चीफ सैम मानेकशॉ  हȗ 
और Ǜीमती इंिदरा गाँधी हȗ। यह समय इस बात को भी याद िदलाता है िक जब कोई ऐसा वƪ 
आता है, तो Ģितपक्ष साथ देता है। उस समय हमारे नेता माननीय अटल जी ने इंिदरा जी की 
तार
ीफ करके  कहा था िक हम सरकार क े साथ खड़े हुए हȅ। इसिलए िवप क्ष को याद रखना चािहए 
िक िकस ढंग से सरकार का समथर्न िकया जाता है, परंतु मुझे एक बात याद आती है िक आज 
जहाँ कहीं भी इंिदरा जी की आत्मा होगी, वह बहुत अचंिभत और ÎतÅध होती होगी िक क्या यह 
वही पाटीर् है और क्या यह वही पिरव
ार है, िजसके  नेता का पािकÎतान का पूवर् मंतर्ी फवाद चौधरी 
समथर्न करता है और यह वह है, जो कहता था िक मȅने पुलवामा मȂ घुसकर मारा है?  िजनका  
ख्वाज़ा आिसफ, उनके  रक्षा मंतर्ी समथर्न करते हȅ, िजनके  बारे पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी इम रान खान  floor 
of the House पर बोलते हȅ, और िजनका नाम पािकÎतान क े यू.एन. क े डोिज़यर मȂ िलखा जाता 
है?  मुझे लगता है िक मȅ इंिदरा जी को इन्हीं शÅदȗ मȂ Ǜǉांजिल दे सकता हूं िक :  
 
'बूढ़ा वंश इंिदरा जी का उपजा ऐसा लाल 
     इįज़त सारी डुबो दई है,ऐसा िकया कमाल।' 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
157

 
 
 
महोदय, मȅ आगे कहना चाहता हूं िक जब हम इस सदन मȂ, संिवधान क े 75 वष र् क े उपलÑय मȂ 
एकितर्त हुए हȅ, तो शायद वह 75 वष र् क े इितहास का सबसे ऐितहािसक मौका था। सर, आपके  
िलए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...सर, आपके  िलए है, आप आगे सुिनए।  
महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहत
ा हूं िक एक महत्वपूणर् बात थी। वह महत्वपूणर् बात यह थी िक एक 
तरफ Seventh Fleet भेजा गया था और चंद िदनȗ क े अंदर अमरीका ने मान्यता भी दे दी थी। 
हमने  93,000 Prisoners of War छोड़े, मगर Po K मȂ क ु छ नहीं कर पाए। चिलए, वह एक अलग 
बात है, लेिकन हमारे 54 Prisoners of War पािकÎतान मȂ थे, वे नहीं िमल पाए – इसका मुझे 
आज तक आÌचयर् है। मुझे आÌचयर् है िक 93,000 देकर 54 नहीं ले पाए, सुलह की कौन-सी शक्ल 
सँवरती रही? मȅ इनकी पॉिलसी क े िलए कहना चाहूंगा।...(Ëयवधान)...मȅ आपके  नेताओं क े िलए 
बोल रहा हूं। मȅ एक पंिƪ कह रहा हूं, आप सुिनए। बात तो सुिनए, आप क्यȗ परेशान हो रहे हȅ?  मȅ 
कह रहा हूँ, 'चीन छीन देश का गुलाब ले गया' – यह पंिडत नेहरू  क े िलए है, वे गुलाब का फ ू ल 
लगाते थे। मȅ कहना चाहता हूं: 
'चीन छी
न देश का गुलाब ले गया 
ताशकं द मȂ वत न  का  लाल सो गया। 
और ये सुलह की शƛ को सँवारते रहे 
      और जीतने क े बाद बाजी हारते रहे। ' 
 
महोदय, मȅ अब आज क े िवषय पर आता हूं, जो संिवधान क े संदभर् मȂ है। अभी अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी 
जी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):  क ृपया बैठ जाइए।  
 
डा .सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  सब िदखाई पड़ रहा है। देिखए, मȅने तो इनके  नेताओं की तारीफ की है, िफर 
भी इनसे तारीफ हज़म नहीं हो पा रही है।...(Ëयवधान)...मȅ इसीिलए कह रहा हूं, आप सुिनए। 
जब हम संिवधान क े िवष
य पर आते हȅ, तो संिवधान का सबसे पहला वाक्य है - ‘We the people 
of India’  अथार्Þ ‘हम भारत क े लोग।’ सभापित महोदय, अगर ’हम’, ’हम लोग’ और ’भारत ’ - 
इन तीन शÅ दȗ  का अथर् समझ लȂ, तो संिवधान िनमार्ताओं का मूल भाव समझा जा सकता है, मगर 
अफसोस है िक सवार्िधक ĥम इसी िवषय को लेकर िकया जाता है। अभी अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी जी 
ने बोला और कई वƪाओं ने भी बोला िक इस बात की आशंका थी िक हम democracy मȂ survive 
करȂगे या नह
ीं करȂगे, लेिकन survive करने वाली बात नहीं है, मȅ अपने आज क े समय क े िवपक्षी 
दलȗ से कहता हूं िक पूरे  Eastern Hemisphere को उठाकर देिखए, बड़े देशȗ मȂ sustainable, 
absolute and vibrant democracy िसफर् भारत है, जापान और ऑÎटर्ेिलया तो Constitutiona
l 
monarchy हȅ। यिद देखा जाए, तो पूरे पूवीर् गोलाǉर् मȂ    absolute democracy, vibrant 
democracy and consistent democracy िसफर् भारत है। हमȂ यह भी समझना चािहए िक आज 
democracy क े under िवÌव की 34  Ģितशत population है, िजसमȂ से 17 Ģितशत अके ले हम हȅ।   
We ar
e the defenders of democracy in the entire world. कोई और नहीं है, िजसे दूसरे नेता 
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
जाकर समझते हȗगे। परंतु मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक अगर हमने democracy मȂ survive  
िकया है, तो यह कोई अनायास नहीं है। Constituent Assembly की िडबेट मȂ डा. राधाकृ Íणन ने 
जो कहा था, मȅ उसे क्वोट करता हूं। उन्हȗने कहा था, 'गणतांितर्क ËयवÎथा इस देश क े िलए कोई 
नया Ģयोग नहीं है, यह इि
तहास क े आरंभ काल से भारत की ËयवÎथा मȂ थी।' मȅ बाबा साहेब 
अÇबेडकर को क्वोट करना चाहूंगा। उन्हȗने कहा था, 'लोकतंतर् की अवधारणा भारत क े िलए कोई 
बाहर की अवधारण
ा नहीं है,  It is not an alien object. यह कोई अपिरिचत चीज़ नहीं है, यह 
Ģाचीन काल से भारत की ËयवÎथाओं मȂ िनिहत थी।' उन्हȗने बौǉ संघȗ का उÊलेख िकया था। मȅ 
अपने सÇमाननीय िमतर्ȗ को बताना चाहता हूं िक भारत मȂ लोकतंतर् की ËयवÎथा कहाँ से थी। आप 
कनार्टक मȂ, 12वीं शत
ाÅदी क े भगवान बसवन्ना  क े अनुभव मंडपȗ को देिखए। चोल साĦाज्य मȂ 8वीं 
और 9वीं शताÅदी मȂ गाँव क े elected Ģितिनिध होते थे।  
 उसके  पीछे जाइए, तो वैशाली का गणराज्य है, िजसका उÊलेख हमारे जदयू क े अध् यक्ष 
जी ने भी िकया। उसके  पीछे जाइए, तो वैिदक काल मȂ सभा और सिमितयाँ बैठकर इसी 
लोकतांितर्क ËयवÎथा क े तहत कायर् िकया करती थीं। बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर, जो डर्ािंÄटग किमटी 
क े चेयरमैन थे, अगर उन्हȗने इन सारी परंपराओं क े िचतर् उसमȂ रखे हȅ, तो इसका अथर् हुआ िक 
भारत की डेमोकर्े सी मूल रूप  मȂ वहाँ से आती है। मȅ एक और बात क्वोट कर देता हूँ। भारत रत्न, 
पूवर् राÍटर्पित, डा. Ģणब मुखजीर् जी ने भी जून, 2018 मȂ आरएसएस हेडक्व ाटर्र पर अपने भाषण मȂ 
कहा था िक "भारत ही लोकतंतर् का मूल है और वैशाली का गणराज्य िवÌव का पहला गणराज्य 
था।"  
महोदय, अब मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक भ ारत क ैसा है। हमारे िवरोधी लोगȗ को िवदेश की बात 
ज्यादा समझ मȂ आती है, तो देश क्या कहता है, उससे ज्यादा यह समिझए िक िवदेश क्या कहता 
है। मȅ िसफर् दो बड़े देशȗ क े नाम लूँगा। चाइन ा - मȅ कहता हूँ िक कोई भी जाकर चेक कर लीिजए 
िक ancient चाइनीज़ मȂ भारत का नाम क्या है - Tianzhu. वहाँ पर ‘Zhu’ शÅद का Ģयोग क Ȃ दर् क े 
िलए होता है, जैसे हमारे भारत मȂ पुर है, जयपुर, नागपुर, कानपुर वगैरह। अगर आप आज जाकर 
‘Tianzhu’
 सचर् करȂगे, तो उन्हȗने िविकपीिडया मȂ क ु छ घपला कर रखा है। सीधे-सीधे िलखकर 
नहीं आता है, पर चाइनीज़ भाषा की िडक्शनरी मȂ जाइए, उसमȂ ‘Tian’ का अथर् है - हेवेन और 
‘Zhu’ का अथर् है - क Ȃदर्। Ancient चा इना मȂ माना जाता था िक भारत क्या है - ‘It is a centre of 
Heaven.’ Ancient Japanese मȂ भारत का नाम है – ‘Tenjiku’, that is, a centre of Heaven’ 
और यह कहते हȅ िक देश ही नहीं था! चीन भी कह रहा है और जापान भी कह रहा है िक यह देश 
तो वह है, जो Îवगर् का क Ȃ दर् था। अब मȅ िमिडल ईÎ ट क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहता हूँ। अरब मȂ आठवीं 
और दसवीं शताÅदी मȂ अरब क े िजतने भी बड़े-बड़े राइटसर् हुए, Ibn-e-aseer हȗ, Ibn-e-kaseer 
हȗ, al-Tabrari हȗ या  Ibn Khaldun हȗ, उन्हȗने क्या िलखा है – Ash’uru bi-naseem b'rid 
ya’t" min Bilad al-Hind,  यानी "When I look towards India, the cool breeze o f 
knowledge comes to us." पूवर् का भी बता िदया, पिÌचम का भी बता िदया, मगर हम क्या 
करȂ? इंिडया क े िलए जमर्न िवǎान Arthur Schopenhauer ने िलखा िक यहाँ पर "Product of 
Highest Human Wisdom" उपिनषदȗ की एक िफलॉसफी है। यह है हमारा देश था, मगर 
अफसोस िक आज भी लोग यह कहते हȅ -- जब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी यह कहते हȅ िक 
"Bharat
 is the mother of democracy", तो वे यह संिवधान की मूल भावना क े अनुरूप  कहते 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
159

 
 
हȅ, मगर अभी भी कई लोगȗ को "defenders of democracy" कहीं ओर से नजर आते हȅ। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारे इस देश क े िलए क्या कहा जाता था -  
 
“गायिन्त देवाः िकल गीितकािन धन्याÎतु ते भारतभूिमभागे। 
Îवगार्पवगार्Îपदहेतुभूत भविन्त भूयः पुरुषाः सुरत्वाÞ।” 
 
अथार्त यह भारत भूिम धन्य है, इसकी Îतुित मȂ देवता भी गीत गाते हȅ, क्यȗिक Îवगर् मȂ रहने क े बाद 
भी यहाँ मनुÍय क े रूप  मȂ जन्म लेने को लालाियत रहते हȅ, यह मोक्ष भूिम है। मȅ,  on a lighter  
note, कहना चाहूँगा िक जो लोग मानते नहीं हȅ िक भारत डेमोकर्े सी है, वे लोग कहते हȅ िक यह 
लोकतंतर् इंग्लȅड क े Magna Carta 1215 से आया था और वे इंग्लȅड को मदर ऑफ डेमोकर्े सी 
मानते हȅ, तो मȅ कहना चाहूँगा िक इंग्लȅड क े पूवर् Ģध ान मंतर्ी की मदर-इन-लॉ सुधा मूिर्त जी हमारे 
इसी सदन की सदÎय हȅ, आप मदर ऑफ़ डेमोकर्े सी नहीं मान रहे, तो मदर-इन-लॉ ऑफ 
डेमोकर्े सी ही मान लेना चा िहए।   
महोदय, मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक यह देश क ै से एक था। जो 'We the people' कहा 
गया है, मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक जब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को Ǜी राम जन्मभूिम का उǇाटन 
करना था, उससे पहले वे दिक्षण क े िजन मंिदरȗ मȂ गए थे, उनमȂ से एक तिमल नाडु का 
रंगनाथÎवामी मंिदर, Ǜीरंगम है। उस Ǜीरंगम मंिदर की महǄा क्या है? यह माना जाता है िक जो 
अयोध्या क े क ु ल देवता हȅ - भगवान िवÍणु, वे रंगनाथÎवामी क े रूप  मȂ वहाँ िवǏमान हȅ, क्यȗिक जब 
उन्हȂ युǉ कर
ना था, िवभीषण का राज्यािभषेक करना था, तब उन्हȗने अपने क ु ल देवता को वहाँ 
Îथािपत िकया। समिझए, वे अयोध्या क े नरेश हȅ, पर क ु ल देवता तिमलनाडु मȂ हȅ - देश इस Ģकार 
से जुड़ता है। भगवान क ृÍण ने अपना शरीर छो
ड़ा ǎारका मȂ और ǭदय जगन्नाथ पुरी मȂ है - देश 
इस तरीके  से जुड़ता है। इसके  बावजूद लोगȗ को समझ मȂ नहीं आता है िक यह देश कभी जुड़ता 
था, तो मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक आज भी जब कभी आप पूजा करते हȅ और हाथ मȂ जल लेते हȅ, तब 
पंिडत क्या बो
लते हȅ -  
'गंगे च यमुने चैव गोदावरी सरÎवती। 
नमर्दे िसन्धु कावेरी जलऽि Îमन्सिƐिंध क ुरु।।' 
 
देश की सारी निदयȗ का Îमरण हो जाता है। इस Ģकार से देश एक संकÊप क े थर्ू आकर जुड़ता है, 
इसिलए इसकी डेिफनेशन भी दी गई है। हमारे काँÎटीǷूशन मȂ 'India, that is, Bharat' कहा 
गया है, तो इंिडया एक geographical connotation है, जो Indus river क े इस तरफ है, िफर 
देश क ै से नहीं था? भारत क े बारे मȂ कहा गया है - 
  
“उǄरं यÞ समुदर्Îय िहमादर्ेǙैव दिक्षणç | 
वषȊ तà भारतं नाम भारती यतर् सन्तितः ||” 
 
 पूरे भारत की डेिफनेशन दी गई है, जो समुदर् क े उǄर मȂ और िहमालय क े दिक्षण मȂ है, मगर हम 
क्या बताएं िक अभी भी लोगȗ क े िदमाग मȂ वह िवचार है। 
160
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 अब मȅ अगले िवषय पर आता हूं – Îवतंतर्ता आंदोलन।   कांगर्ेस बहुत दावा करती है िक 
उसने Îवतंतर्ता आंदोलन मȂ बड़ा काम िकया है।   इसमȂ िनिÌचत रूप  से कांगर्ेस क े बड़े नेताओं का 
योगदान था, हम इसको नकारते नहीं है, परंतु उस योगदान क े बाद उस योगदान मȂ िकतना  
िमÍठान्न  लेने का Ģयास हुआ, इस संबंध मȂ मȅ कांगर्ेस क े एक नेता को क्वोट करना चाहता हूं।   
आप सभी ने वह बड़ा Ģिसǉ गीत सुना होगा – ‘ कदम कदम बढ़ाए जा, खुशी क े गीत गाए जा’।  
यह आजाद िंहद फौज का गीत था, इसको िलखने वाले वंशीधर शुक्ल थे।  वे कांगर्ेस क े नेता थे।  
1942 मȂ भारत छोड़ो आंदोलन की वजह से उनको नौकरी से िनकाल िदया गया।  वे लखनऊ मȂ 
आकाशवाणी मȂ कायर् कर
ते थे। पर आजादी क े तुरंत बाद उन्हȗने जो ĥÍटाचार देखा, उस पर 
उन्हीं की पंिƪ को मȅ क्वोट करता हूं। पहले कांगर्ेस का सदÎयता शुÊक एक चवन्नी हुआ करता 
था और नारा होता था – 'एक चवƐ
ी चांदी की, जय बोलो महात्मा गांधी की'।   वंशीधर शुक्ल जी 
ने िलखा िक अब क्या होने लगा है, उन्हȗने कहा: 
"कहां ऊ बेिड़न की झंकार, कहां ई क ुसीर् गǈेदार, 
कहां चवƐी मांगे गुजर, कहां अब िरǚत बेशुमार, 
हुइगा Îवतंतर् भारत हमार' 
आगे उन्हȗने िलखा : 
"कॉलेज की सब िखड़की Îवतंतर्, टीचर, लड़का, लड़की Îवतंतर्, 
हािकम Îवतंतर्, हरहा Îवतंतर्, गिलयार घूर चरहा Îवतंतर्, 
परतंतर् हुए ईमानदार, हुइगा Îवतंतर् भारत हमार।" 
 
मȅ यह 1950 क े आसपास की बात कर रहा हूं।  अब मȅ संिवध
ान की तरफ आता हूं।  पहले संिवधान 
संशोधन क े बारे मȂ हमारे बहुत से लोग बोल चुक े हȅ, मȅ उसकी िडटेल मȂ नह ीं जाना चाहता हूं।  मȅ 
िसफर् यह बताना चाहता हूं िक अिभËयिƪ की Îवतंतर्ता, ģीडम ऑफ Îपीच हमारी परंपरा मȂ है 
और परंपरा िजस सीमा से है, मȅ चुनौती से कहता हूं िक दुिनया मȂ ऐसी कोई क ंटर्ी, कोई 
िसिवलाइजेशन नहीं हो सकता।  हमारे यहां जहां एक तरफ ये माना गया है िक वेद ĤǨ वाक्य हȅ - 
वेद वाक्यम जनादर्नम, तो यहीं पर एक ऐसा भी संĢदाय हुआ, िजसने कहा – ‘ तर्यो वेदÎय 
कतार्र: धूतर्, भांड, िनशाचरा: -
 वेद क े पढ़ने वाले तीन - धूतर्, भांड और िनशाचर, उस चावार्क  
को भी Îथान िदया गया।   क्या इससे ज्यादा उदार ģीडम ऑफ Îपीच िकसी को चािहए, जो यह 
कहते हȅ िक ģीडम ऑफ Îपीच िसफर् पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  क े माध्यम से आई थी!  
अब मȅ बताना चाहत
ा हूं, जो फÎटर् अमȂडमȂट हुआ, अगर उस समय दो घटनाएं नहीं होती - 15 
िदसंबर, 1950 को सरदार पटेल जी की मृत्यु हो गई थी और 6 अĢैल, 1950 को  ÌयामाĢसा द 
मुखजीर् जी ने क ैिबनेट छोड़ िदया था।   अगर इन दोनȗ मȂ से सरकार मȂ कोई होता, तो मुझे पूरा 
िवÌवास है िक यह नहीं हो पाया होता।  उस ģीडम ऑफ Îपीच की क ै जुअिलटी क्या हुई, मȅ यह 
बताना चाहता हूं।   बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने जब 6 अक्टूबर, 1951
 को अपना इÎतीफा िदया - 
जयराम रमेश जी ने वह बात ठीक कही थी िक वह सरकार क े आंकड़ो मȂ भी उपलÅध है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश:  वह िरकॉडर् मȂ है। 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
161

 
 
 
डा .  सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  जी, वह िबÊकु ल है।  सर, यह तो है, मगर अब मȅ क्वोट करना चाहता हूं - 
बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी क े बारे मȂ पǍ भूषण धनंजय कीर, िजनको इंिदरा जी की सरकार क े 
ǎारा पǍ भूषण ĢाÃत था, उन्हȗने बाबा साहेब की सबसे ऑथȂिटक ऑटोबायोगर्ाफी िलखी -  
उन्हȗने िलखा, 10 अक्टूबर, 1951 को लोक सभा मȂ बोलने क े िलए जब खड़े हुए और कहा िक मुझे 
अपना बयान ĢÎतुत करने की अनुमित दी जाए, तो उपसभापित ने कहा िक Ǜीमान अÇबेडकर, 
अगर आपने अपने भाषण की कॉपी हमȂ पहले दे दी होती, तो हम अनुमित दे सकते थे। आप चाहे 
तो 6 बजे क े बाद अपना बयान दे सकते हȅ।  उपसभापित की बात सुनकर अÇबेडकर जी को 
अचरज हुआ और धक्का लगा। संसद सदÎय Ǜी क ुंजरू  और Ǜी कामत ने उपसभापित से पूछा 
क्या अÇबेडकर क े भाषण की जांच की जाएगी?  इस  पर उपसभापित ने कहा िक मुझे देखना 
जरूरी है - इस पर ध्यान देने की जरूरत है – डा . अÇबेडक र क े बयान मȂ क ु छ अĢासंिगक या 
बदनामी करने वाली बात तो नहीं है। तब डा. अÇबेडकर ने गरज कर कहा िक मȅ इस तरह की 
तानाशाही क े आगे नहीं झुक ूंगा और यह कहकर वे सदन क े बाहर चले गए और Ģेस मȂ उन्हȗने 
अपना वƪË
य जारी िकया। 
अब मȅ दूसरा एक उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं।  ये लोग बहुत बात करते हȅ िक डा. अÇबेडकर 
क े िवषय मȂ इनके  क्या िवचार थे?  मȅने अÇबेडकर जी का िव चार क्वोट िकया। अब मȅ जवाहरलाल 
नेहरू  जी का िवचार क्वोट कर रहा हूं।  जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने 16 जनवरी, 1952 को चुनावȗ क े 
उपरांत एडिवना माउंटबेटन को पतर् िलखा।  उसमȂ एक लाइन है, मȅ क्वोट कर रहा हूं और सोसर् 
भी क्वोट करूं गा:-"On the other hand, i
n Bombay ci ty and, to a large extent, in 
Bombay Province, our success has b een greater than  expected."  यानी वे चुनाव मȂ 
िवजय पर खुशी जािहर कर रहे हȅ और आगे कह रहे हȅ - "Ambedkar has been dropped 
out", यानी Ģसन्नता है िक अÇबेडकर जी चुनाव हार गए हȅ।  मȅ पूरा पतर् नहीं पढ़ रहा हूं, इसी पतर् 
मȂ वे आगे िलखते हȅ - "T
he socialists combined with Ambedkar’s Party and thereby they 
lost their repute."  यानी अÇबेडकर जी की पाटीर् से जुड़कर उनकी ĢितÍठा कम हो गई।  एक 
महत्वपूणर् बात पर मȅ सदन का ध्यान िदलाना चाहूंगा और वे आगे कहते हȅ - "But Ambedkar 
has combined with Hindu communalists." यानी वे कह रहे हȅ िक अÇबेडकर जी िंह दूवािदयȗ 
क े साथ आ गए थे।   सर, सोसर् है -‘Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru’, Series 2, 
Volume 17, pages 35 to 37.  मुझे लगता है िक शायद पतर्ाचार क े बहुत से बक्से िजनकी मांग 
की गई है, वे इसीिलए हटा िलए गए हȗगे िक हर बक्सा अंदर से बोलता हो िक  
 
"बैठा हूं िदल मȂ इतने राज छ ुपाए, जरा सा हȗठ िहले, 
तो न जाने िकत
नȗ क े िदल डगमगाए" 
 
सर, अब मȅ आगे ģीडम ऑफ Îपीच क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहूंगा।  इमरजȂसी क े िवषय पर तो बहुत से 
लोगȗ ने अपनी बात कही है।  अब मȅ आगे क े िवषय क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहूंगा।  
 इस देश मȂ freedom of 
speech को curtail करने क े िलए Constitution Amendment 
लाया गया, जो कभी हो नहीं पाया। वह था - Post-Office (Amendment) Bill, 1986, िजसमȂ 
162
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सरकार ने यह अिधकार िलया था िक वह िजसकी िचƻी चाहे खोल कर पढ़ सकती है और उसमȂ 
आपिǄजनक हो, तो उस पर कारर्वाई कर सकती है, जैसे आज कोई यह कहे िक सरकार आपका 
कोई भी Ëहाट्सऐप, ईमेल, मैसेज पढ़ सकती है और पढ़ने क े बाद कारर्वाई कर सकती है। वह तो 
भला हो ज्ञान
ी जैल िंसह जी का, जो उस समय राÍटर्पित थे, िजन्हȗने उस संवैधािनक ËयवÎथा का 
उपयोग िकया िक उन्हȗने उसे वापस ही नहीं िकया, इसिलए वह कभी वाÎतिवक अथș मȂ आ नहीं 
पाया। दूसरा, मȅ राजीव गांधी जी क े सम
य का quote करना चाहता हूं। 29 अगÎत, 1988 को Anti-
Defamation Bill आया, यानी कोई सरकार की आलोचना करेगा, तो उस पर कारर्वाई होगी, 
मगर उस समय Ģबल िवरोध क े चलते वह नहीं हो पाया। िफर मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक डा. 
मनमोहन िंसह जी ने 2009 मȂ IT Act, 2000 मȂ सेक्शन 68ए को amend िकया, जो सुĢीम कोटर् क े 
ǎारा struck down कर िदया गया। इसके  उपरांत मȅ यह भी बताना चाहत
ा हूं िक 'One Nation, 
One Election' की जो संवैधािनक ËयवÎथा थी, यह कहां से ट ूटी थी, जब कांगर्ेस मȂ अंतरात्मा की 
आवाज जाग गई थी।  1967 तक सारे इलेक्शंस एक साथ होते थे। िफर एक ऐसा िव
िचतर् उदाहरण 
हुआ िक अंतरात्मा की आवाज जागी और उस पाटीर् की Ģधान मंतर्ी, इंिदरा जी ने अपनी ही पाटीर् 
क े राÍटर्पित क े candidate, नीलम संजीव रेƿी जी को चुनाव हर
वा िदया। मुझे लगता है िक ऐसा 
िविचतर् संवैधािनक उदाहरण भारत क े इितहास मȂ देखने को नहीं िमलेगा।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक उसके  बाद उन की अंतरात्मा की आवाज 
इतनी जागी िक िनजिंलगÃपा, कामराज, चौधरी चरण िंसह, चंदर्शेखर, मोरारजी देसाई ने पाटीर् 
छोड़ दी। 1977 मȂ देवराज असर् और बाबू जगजीवन राम ने पाटीर् छोड़ दी। िफर 1990 मȂ अजुर्न िंसह 
और एन.डी. ितव ारी  जी ने छोड़ दी, शरद पवार जी ने छोड़ दी। कांगर्ेस इतनी हो गई िक मुझे याद 
है, बचपन मȂ मȅ अटल जी की एक Îपीच सुनने गया था, उन्हȗने कहा था िक कांगर्ेस की तो आज 
िÎथित यह है िक इतनी कांगर्ेस है िक कांगर्ेस(आर), कांगर्ेस(एस), कांगर्ेस(ओ), कांगर्ेस(यू), 
कांगर्ेस(मȅ), कांगर्ेस(तू), कांगर्ेस(आई) कांगर्ेस(गई)।  
 सर, मȅ एक िवषय लेना चाहूंगा। वह िवषय यह है, िजसका संिव धान मȂ सवार्िधक दुरुपयोग  
िकया गया। वह िवषय है - 'Secular'. जब संिवधान सभा मȂ 15 नवंबर, 1948 को यह िडबेट हुई, 
तो यह ĢÎताव क े.टी. शाह जी ने रखा िक 'secular' शÅद include िकया जाना चािहए। मगर यह 
बात आई िक अगर 'secu
lar' word होगा, तो 'minority'  नहीं हो सकता और अगर 'minority' 
होगा, तो 'secular' नहीं हो सकता, क्यȗिक 'religious minority' Theocratic State मȂ होती है, 
Secular State मȂ नहीं होती है। मगर इसके  बावजूद उस िवषय को आगे रखा गया और डा. 
अÇबेडकर ने क्या कहा, मȅ िसफर् quote करता हूं। उन्हȗने कहा, "Mr. Vice-President, Sir, I 
regret that I cannot accept the Amendment proposed by Prof. K.T. Shah and my 
objections are stated briefly."
 उन्हȗने आगे जाकर इस Ģकार से recommendation की। 
यानी बहुत साफ बात थी िक उन्हȗने इस शÅद को reject िकया, मगर democracy क े सबसे काले 
दौर मȂ जब सारा िवपक्ष जेल मȂ था, मानवािधकार समाÃत हो चुक े थे, तब संिवधान की उǈेिशका, 
िजसे डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने 'संिवधान की आत्मा' कहा था, उसमȂ change िक
या गया। 
िसफर् इतना ही नहीं रहा, जब से वह word आया, उसके  बाद क्या हुआ! उसके  बाद तो इस देश मȂ 
क्या हुआ िक Personal
 Law Board आ गया। उसके  बाद क्या हुआ िक एक ऐसा समय आया, 
जब सुĢीम कोटर् और शिरया मȂ यह लगा िक मतभेद है, तो इस देश की संसद ने सवȘच्च 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
163

 
 
न्यायालय क े िनणर्य को रȚद कर शाहबानो क े स मȂ शिरया को सुĢीम कोटर् से ऊपर कर िदया। मȅ 
िवनĦता से कहना चाहता हूं िक दुिनया क े िकसी सेक ुलर देश मȂ ऐसा कोई एक उदाहरण बता दȂ, 
तो मȅ अपना बयान वापस लेने को तैयार हूं। उसके  उपरांत इतना ही नहीं हुआ, िफर Places o f 
Worship Act आया। वह कहता है िक 15 अगÎत, 1947 क े बाद कोई change नहीं होगा। ठीक है, 
मगर महोदय, िफर Wakf Board Act आया, जो यह कहता है िक कोई समय सीमा नहीं रहेगी। 
सूरत नगर िनगम पर दावा इस बात पर है िक मुगलȗ क े जमाने मȂ वह सराय थी। ितरुच Ȃदरी मंिदर 
पर दावा इस बात पर है िक अकार्ट क े नवाब ने दे िदया था। यानी 200 साल, 300 साल पहले की 
सरकारȗ क े वे फरमान, जो िक सरकारȂ िकस िहसाब से मानती थीं। िफ र Communal Violence 
Bill आया।  
 अब मȅ िसफर् संक्षेप मȂ 10 िंबदु बोलना चाहता हूं, जो लोग आज कहते हȅ िक इस संिवधान मȂ 
उन्हȗने क्या िकया। मदरसा बोडर् आया, मुिÎलम पसर्नल लॉ बोडर् आया, इन सबको संवैधािनक 
संरक्षण ĢाÃत है। चार पत्नी रखना, िटर्पल तलाक, हलाला, मेहरम, बािलका से िवव
ाह करना, 
तलाकशुदा मिहला को कोई मुआवजा न देना, हज सिÅसडी, वक्फ बोडर्। अब मȅ िवनĦता से कहना 
चाहता हूं िक इन लोगȗ ने इस कॉिन् ÎटǷूशन को secularism  का िशकार करते हुए partially 
Shariya constitution  बनाने का Ģयास िकया, ...(Ëयवधान)... अन्यथा कोई गैर मुिÎलम देश 
िदखा दȂ, िजसमȂ इस Ģकार की बात हुई हो! कोई सेक्यूलर देश, 200 देश हȅ, वहां पर बड़े िवǎान 
लोग बैठे हुए हȅ, ...(Ëयव
धान)... मȅ बताना चाहता हूं, कोई उदाहरण बताइएगा, िजस Îटेट मȂ 
सुĢीम कोटर् से ऊपर शिरया हो! ...(Ëयवधान)... अब मȅ बताना चाहता हूं, ...(Ëयवधान)... बड़े 
िवǎान लोग उधर बैठे हुए हȅ, ...(Ëय वधान)... मुझे कोई जरूरत  नहीं है, ...(Ëयवधान)... 200 मȂ 
िसफर् चार सेक्यूलर देश बताइएगा, मȅ अपना बयान वापस ले लूंगा ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : क ृपया बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... क ृपया बैिठए। ...(Ëय वधान)...   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: जहां शिरया सवȘच्च न्यायालय से ऊपर हो। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ यह भी बताना 
चाहता हूं िक इतना ही नहीं था। ...(Ëयवधान)... संिवधान का अपमान आप लोगȗ ने िकया। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक जो लोग मनुÎमृित की बात करते हȅ, उन्हȗने भारत क े 
संिवधान को 'मौलवी िÎ
कर्Ãट' बनाने का Ģयास िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह अपने आप मȂ शमर्नाक 
बात है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  शमर् उस समय आनी चािहए थी, जब इस तरह क े पिरवतर्न कर रहे थे। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ एक और बात कहना चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप बैठ जाइए, Ãलीज़।  ...(Ëयवधा
न)...  सबको अपनी 
बात कहने का अिधकार है। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, एक िमनट।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   मȅ टेिक्नकल बात कह 
रहा हूँ।  मेरी बात गलत लगेगी, तो मȅ अपने बयान वापस ले लूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...   सर, आप 
सुिनए। 
164
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
वक्फ बोडर् एक्ट मȂ मुगलȗ क े जमाने क े फरमान को कांÎटीǷूशनल मान्यता ĢाÃत है। यह वह 
संिवधान था, वे सरकारȂ थी, िजनमȂ िजÇमी का कांसेÃट था, िजसमȂ जिजया का कांसेÃट था, जहां 
बादशाह सैकड़ȗ लोगȗ को मारकर 'गाजी' की उ पािध लेते थे।...(Ëयवधान)...  
   
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): क ृपया बैठ जाइए। ...( Ëयवधान)... क ृपया बैठ जाएँ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: Even, अकबर ने भी 'गाजी' की उपािध ली है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
डा. सुधा
ंशु ितर्वेदी : यिद इस Ģकार की चीजȗ को...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : क ृपया उनको अपनी बात कहने दȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  सर, मȅ पूछना चाहता हूं िक िजÇमी और जिजया क े फरमानȗ को 
कांÎटीǷूशनल मान्यता देना क्या शिरया को संिव
धान मȂ लागू  करना नहीं है? ...(Ëयवधान)...   
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  सर, इसीिलए मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक आज मामला ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :
 सुधांशु ितर्वेदी जी क े अलावा िकसी अन्य की बात िरकॉडर् 
पर नहीं जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज मामला मनुÎमृित बनाम संिवधान का नहीं है।  
संिवधान क े बाबा साहेब की पहचान और संिवधान क े ऊपर शिरया क े िन
 शान की है।  इसीिलए मȅ 
िबÊकु ल ईमानदारी से कहना चाहता हूं िक इन लोगȗ को बहुत समÎया लगती है।  
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : सुधांशु ितर्वेदी जी क े अलावा िकसी अन्य की बात िरक
 ॉडर् 
पर नहीं जाएगी।  आप क ृपया शान्त रहȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
   
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  मगर मȅ यह बात भी ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   हम कोई 
मुिÎलम समाज क े िखलाफ नहीं हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   शांित से बोलने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
165

 
 
अगर आप मुझे एक देश िदखा दीिजएगा, जहां आज शिरया सवȘच्च न्यालय से ऊपर हो, तब बात 
किरएगा।  मȅने उदाहरण क्वोट िकया है। 
महोदय, अब मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक हम मुिÎलम समाज क े िखलाफ नहीं हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   आज ही उÎताद जािकर हुसैन का देहांत हुआ है।  अट ल जी की सरकार ने 
उन्हȂ पǍ भूषण िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   मोदी जी की सरकार ने 2023 मȂ पǍ िवभूषण िदया।  
...(Ëयवधान)...    मȅ पूछना चाहता हूँ िक आप यह बताइए िक आपको अÅदुल रहीम खानखाना, 
रसखान, मिलक मोहÇमद जायसी, अशफ़ाक़ु Êलाह ख़ाँ, वी
र अÅदुल हमीद, डा. ए.पी.जे. अÅदुल 
कलाम क्यȗ नहीं नजर आते?  आज हमारे एक गवनर्र आिरफ़ मोहÇमद ख़ान साहब हȅ।  मȅ चैलȂज 
करके  कहता हूँ िक पॉिलिटकल क्लास मȂ अगर उन स े बड़ा कोई आिलम फािजल मुिÎलम हो, जो 
बात करके  िदखा दे, मगर ये उसे नहीं मानते।  हमने डॉक्टर कलाम को राÍटर्पित बनाया, आलम 
ए इÎलाम मȂ बैत अल िहकमत क े बाद से िपछले 700-800 सालȗ मȂ उनसे बड़ा कोई साइंसदां नहीं 
पैदा हुआ, परन्तु ये उन
को नहीं मानते।  ये िकसको मानते हȅ - ज़ािकर नायक, इशरत जहां, 
याकू ब मेनन, बुरहान वानी को।  इसकी वजह से सारी ĢॉÅलम है। ...(Ëयवधान)...     यहां समÎया 
कƺरपंथी जहिनयत की है।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ एक और fac t quote करना चाहता हूँ।  इन लोगȗ को बहुत बुरा 
लगता है।  मȅ Freedom House Report की एक बात कहना चाहता हूँ।  वैसे Freedom House मȂ 
इनके  बहुत से िमतर् लोग भी हȅ।  उसका Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties 
1999-2000 है।   वह कहता है िक दुिनया मȂ धािर्म क  मान्यता का लोकतंतर् से क्या िरÌता है?   वह 
पेज नंबर 10 और 11 पर  िलखता है िक “There is a strong co-relation between electoral 
democracy and Hinduism. ”  वह कहता है िक जहाँ िंहदू धमर् है, वहाँ पर ज्यादा डेमोकर्े सी है।  
उसमȂ िफजी, गुयाना, मॉरीशस, भारत, नेपाल आिद बहुत से देशȗ को क्वोट िकया है।  उसने िफर 
जो आगे कहा है, वह इन
को बुरा लगेगा।  िफर उसने बुिǉÎट ...( Ëयवधान)...     WhatsApp 
नहीं, मȅने िरपोटर् क े साथ क्वोट िकया है।  आप हवा मȂ बात मत कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... अब मȅ 
आपको यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक उन्हȗने आगे एक और बात कही है।  Broo
kings ने अपनी िरपोटर् 
मȂ 2019 मȂ मोदी जी क े समय क्या िलखा है - “India is a silver lining, even a gold lining, of 
democracy.”  The Report was released in February 2019.  WhatsApp की बात करने 
वाले, आप सुिनए।   It was released in February 201 9, titled ‘Democracy and Disorder 
and the Struggle for Influence on New Geopolitics’, page number 31.   
महोदय, अब मȅ एक-दो िवषयȗ का उǄर देना चाहता हूँ, जो हम ारे माननीय िवपक्ष क े नेता 
जी ने कहे।  उन्हȗने कहा िक झंडे का िवरोध करने की बात - हम तो ईमानदारी से कहना चाहते हȅ 
िक हम कभी झंडे क े िवरोध मȂ नहीं थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  अब  सर, पूरी बा त सुिनए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ क्वोट  कर रहा हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...     अब सर, मȅ क्वोट कर रहा हूँ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुिनए, सर।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ महात्मा गांधी को क्वोट कर रहा हूँ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  सुिनए, सुिनए, सर। ...(Ëयवधा न)... मȅ महात्मा गांधी को क्वोट कर रहा हूँ।  
महात्मा गांधी ने 6 अगÎत, 1947 को कहा िक "अगर भारत क े झंडे पर चरखा अंिकत नहीं होगा, 
तो उस झंडे का अिभवादन करने से मȅ इंकार कर दूंगा।  आप तो जानते ही हȅ िक भारत क े राÍटर्ीय 
झंडे की सबसे पहली पिरकÊपना मȅने की थी।  िबना चरखे क े िनशान क े भारतीय झंडे की कÊपना 
166
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
नहीं है।  वैसे पंिडत नेहरू  और अन्य लोगȗ ने मुझे बताया है िक नये ध्वज  मȂ बना चकर् िचन्ह चरखे 
का Ģतीक है, क ु छ लोग इसे सुदशर्न चकर् बताते हȅ, मगर मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह क्या है।"  सर, 
इसका ǣोत संपूणर् गांधी वांग्मय, खंड 89, पृÍठ 11 है।  अब आप बताइए।  आप कहȂगे िक महात्मा 
गांधी उनका िवरोध कर रहे थे। ...( Ëयवधान)..
. इसिलए महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎय, आप दो-तीन िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत 
कर दȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  दो-तीन िमनट मȂ आप अपनी बात समाÃत कर दȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी :  जी, मȅ समाÃत कर रहा हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)...  सर , मȅ एक बात और कहना 
चाहता हूँ।  अंगूठा कटवाने की बात बहुत कही गय
 ी है। वैसे िपछले 60-70 सालȗ मȂ इतने अंगूठे 
कटे हȅ िक उन एकलËयȗ से पूछ िलया जाए, तो समझ मȂ आ जाएगा।  
 
8.00 P.M. 
मगर, जो लोग बहुत ज्ञान बघारते हȅ, मȅ उनसे पूछना चाहता हूँ िक क्या िकसी ने महाभारत मȂ पढ़ा 
है या क ेवल Macaulay का ही thought पढ़ते आ रहे हȅ?  मȅ िकसी का  अपमान नहीं करना 
चाहता।  100 मȂ 99 लोगȗ को यह नहीं पता िक वह िकस चैÃटर मȂ है।  वह महाभारत क े वनपवर् मȂ 
है, जब एकलËय का पूरा वृǄान्त  आत
ा है।  जब दर्ोणाचायर् उससे पूछते हȅ िक तुम अपना पिरचय 
दो, तो वह कहता है िक मȅ मगध नरेश जरासंध क े Ģधान सेनापित िहरण्यधनु का पुतर् एकलËय हूँ। 
He was the chief o
f armed forces. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎयगण, जो बोलने क े िलए बचे हुए माननीय 
सदÎय हȅ, उनको कल अवसर िमल सके गा।  सुधांशु जी, आप एक-दो िमनट मȂ समाÃत कर 
दीिजए।  
 
डा .सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: जी, मȅ समाÃत कर ता हूँ।  इसिलए मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब आप हकीकत मȂ 
देखȂगे, तो समझ मȂ आएगा। मȅ आज Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा। महोदय, जरासंध 
की सेना वह थी, जो उस समय भारत की सबसे शिƪशाली सेना थी, िजसके  िलए क ृÍण जी भी 
एक बार मैदान छोड़ा  था, तो उनका रणछोड़ नाम पड़ा था।  उसक
ा चीफ एक टर्ाइबल था, आप 
यह पूरी बात भी तो बताइए! आज 5,000 साल क े बाद जब महामिहम राÍटर्पित टर्ाइबल समाज से 
हȅ, तो पहली बार तीनȗ सेनाओं का सवȘच्च अध्यक्ष एक बार पुनः टर्ाइबल हुआ है।   मुझे लगता है 
िक भारत की परंपरा को सही ढंग से समझने का यह एक अवसर िमला है।   
महोदय, मȅ एक-दो लाइन मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूँ।  मȅ कहना चाहत ा हूँ िक अगर 
महाभारत ही पढ़नी है तो महिर्ष वेदËयास की दृिÍट से पढ़ो, िवदुर की दृिÍट से पढ़ो।  यिद उसे 
भाइयȗ को लड़ाने वाले शकु िन की दृिÍट से पढ़ोगे तो यही नजर आएगा।  मगर क्या बताएँ महोदय, 
भाइयȗ को लड़ाने वाले शकु िन, भाइयȗ को लड़ाने वाली मंथरा की मनोवृिǄ इस देश मȂ इतनी 
ËयाÃत हो गई है िक आज इस देश को -- सर, मȅ एक Ãवाइंट और कहना चा
हता हूँ।   
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
167

 
 
सर, committed judiciary की तो बहुत बात की गई, पर इस देश मȂ एक ऐसा उदाहरण 
भी हुआ है, जब एक जज, कांगर्ेस का नेता रहने क े बाद जज हो गया।  सर, 1962 से 1968 तक 
Justice Baharul Islam राज्य सभा मȂ कांगर्ेस क े सदÎय रहे। िफर, 1968 से 1972 तक दोबारा 
सदÎय रहे।  1972 मȂ उन्हȗने िरजाइन िकया और गुवाहाटी हाई कोटर् क े जज बन गए।  िफर, वे 
गुवाहाटी हाई कोटर् मȂ ची
फ जिÎटस बने।  उसके  बाद, उन्हȗने िरजाइन िकया और उनको बरपेटा 
से कांगर्ेस का िटकट िम ला।  जब वह िटकट इलेक्शन countermand मȂ अमान्य हो गया, तो वे 
1984 मȂ िफर राज्य सभा क े सदÎय बन गए।  भाई, आप बहुत कहȂगे तो यह कहȂगे िक वे इÎतीफे  क े 
बाद राज्य सभा मȂ आए।  कांगर्ेस क े नेता, सांसद रहने क े बाद उन्हȂ सुĢीम कोटर् का जज 8 महीने 
क े गैप क े बाद बनाया गया।  मुझे लगता है िक संिवधान का इस
से बड़ा अपमान नहीं हो सकता था, 
जो हमȂ देखने को िमला।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अंत मȂ एक पंिƪ मȂ िसफर् यह कहना चाहूँगा िक भारत क े लोगȗ क े 
बारे मȂ एक िवचार कीिजए।  क ुं भ का मेला शुरू  होने जा रहा है, जो दुिनया का सबसे बड़
ा 
आयोजन है।  यह िकस साइंिटिफक आधार पर होता है?  यह जुिपटर क े 12 साल क े सकर् ल पूरा 
होने पर होता है।  उन्हȂ तो 200-300 साल पहले जुिपटर क े सकर् ल क े बारे मȂ नहीं पता था, जबिक 
हम हजारȗ साल से इस
को आयोिजत करते आ रहे हȅ।  मगर हम क्या बताएं महोदय, िजनकी सोच 
ही देश क े िलए अलग है, उनके  िलए हम लोग कभी एक गीत गाते थे, जब हमारी सरकार नहीं 
थी।  मȅ उनके  िलए कहना चाहता हूँ : 
"उगा सूयर् क ैसा कहो मुिƪ का ये, 
उजाला करोड़ȗ घरȗ मȂ न पहुंचा। 
न संयम, ËयवÎथा, न एका
त्मता है, 
भरी है अभी तक मनȗ मȂ गुलामी, 
वही राग अंगर्ेिजयत का पुराना, 
सुनाते बड़े लोग नामी िगरामी। 
Ģजातंतर् की धार उतनी गगन से, 
मगर नीर जल सागरȗ तक न पहुंचा।" 
  
मȅ अंत मȂ एक पंिƪ कह
कर अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूँ।   सर, ये िजतना भी िवभाजन िकर्एट 
करने का Ģयास करȂ, पर हम उस िसǉांत को मानते हȅ :  
"जाित, वगर् और Ģांत भेद क े ĥम को दूर भगाता है, 
सबके  मन का भाव एक है, सबकी भारत माता है। 
अनेकता मȂ एक मंतर् को जन-जन िफर अपनाता है, 
देखो Ãयारा देश हमारा आगे बढ़ता जाता है।" 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : The House is adjourned to 
meet at 11.
00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 17th December, 2024. 
 
168
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
The House then adjourned at four minutes past eight of the clock till eleven of the 
clock on Tuesday, the 17th December, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 16 December, 2024 ]
169

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SAB
HA) 
