Vol. 267       Thursday, 
No. 9 13  February, 2025 
            24 Magha, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Lai
d on the Table (pages 1 - 6) 
Report of the Joint Committee on the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024 –  Laid o n 
the table (page 7) 
Record of Evidence of the Joint Commi ttee on the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024 – 
Laid on the table (pag
e 7) 
Motion for Election to the National Tiger Con servation Authority – Adopted (page 7) 
Motion for Nomination to the Co mmittee on Public Accounts (PAC) – A dopted 
(pages 7 - 8) 
Motion for Nomination to the Committee on  Public Undertakings (CoPU) –  Adopted 
(page 8) 
Motion for Nomination to the Committee on  the W elfare of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (SCs & STs) – Adopted (pages 8 - 9) 
President’s Message (page 9 - 10) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (page 10 - 11) 
Regarding disorder in the House and position  of dissent notes in Reports of Select 
Committees (pages 11 - 25 and pages 26 - 28) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 25 - 26 and pages 28 - 50) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
Observations by the Chair (pages 50 - 51)  
The   Union   Budget,   2025-26 –  Discussion   concluded   (  pages   51  -  96   and 
pages 97 -144 ) 
Corrigendum to Appendix-V to the Report of the Joint Committee on the Waqf 
(Amendment) Bill, 2024-Laid on the table (page 96 - 97) 
Special Mentions–  Laid on the Table 
Demand for Railway Over Bridge at  the Railway Crossing No.143 on Amirgarh-
Dabela-Ambaji Road in Banaskantha District (pages 144 - 145) 
Concern over challenges arising in the weather forecasting capabilities due to climate 
change (page 145) 
Demand to make Jabalpur a Logistics Special Economic Zone (SEZ) (pages 145 - 146) 
Demand for Train Service from Goa to Solapur (page 146) 
Concern over Cyber Crimes in the Country (page 147) 
Demand for securing rights and protections for domestic workers (pages 147 - 148) 
Demand for conservation of mangroves in West Bengal (pages 148 - 149) 
Demand for special drive to encourage Sanskrit Education (page 149) 
Demand to reduce the cost of CPAP machine, masks and pipe filters used for treating 
sleep apnea disorders (pages 149 - 150)
 
Concern over spreading of drug addiction among the youth in the border areas of 
Rajasthan (page 150) 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 13th February, 2025/24 Magha, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, papers to be laid on the Table. 
Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of LKA, New Delhi; Kalakshetra Foundation, 
Chennai; CCRT, New Delhi; VRI, Mathura,  Uttar Pradesh; LTWA, Dharamshala, 
Himachal Pradesh; GRMS, Bomdila, Arunacha l Pradesh; Gandhi Smriti and Darshan 
Samiti, New Delhi and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE (RAO INDERJIT 
SINGH):  Sir, I lay on the Table a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following 
papers:- 
(i) (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the  Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA), New Delhi,
for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Akademi.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2145/18/25] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu, for the year 2023-24, together  with   the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Foundation.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2143/18/25] 
(iii)
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Cultural Resources and
Training (CCRT), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b)
Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.

(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2144/18/25]  
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Vrindavan Research Institute (VRI),
Mathura, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on t
he Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2146/18/25] 
(v)
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Library of Tibetan Works & Archives
(LTWA), Dharamshala, Himachal Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Library.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2147/18/25] 
(vi)
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Gaden Rabgyeling Monastic School
(GRMS), Bomdila, Arunachal Pradesh,  for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b)
Review by Government on the working of the above School.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2148/18/25] 
(vii)
(a) Annual Report of the Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti, New Delhi, for the
year 2023-24. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti, New Delhi, for
the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c)
Review by Government on the working of the above Samiti.
(d) Statement giving reasons for delay in  laying the papers mentioned at (a)
and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2149/18/25] 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Notification of the Ministry of Law and justice 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (SHRI ARJUN 
RAM MEGHWAL): Sir, I lay on the Table a copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry 
of Law and Justice (Legislative Departme nt) Notification No. S.O. 5517(E)., dated 
the 20th December, 2024, publishing the Conduct of Elections (Second Amendment) 
Rules, 2024., under sub-section (3) of S ection 169 of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2153/18/25] 
Reports and Accounts (2023-2
4) of vari ous AIIMSs and NIMHANS, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka and related papers 
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ :- 
(A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (4) of the Section 18 and Section 19 of the All India Institute of Medical
Sciences Act, 1956 (as amended in 2012):-
(i) (a) Fourth Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS), Jammu, U.T.
 of Jammu & Kashmir, for the year 2023-
24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2162/18/25] 
(ii)
(a) Fifth Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS), Gorakhpur, Utta r Pradesh, for the year 2023-24
, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2154/18/25] 
(iii)
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), Jodhpur, Rajasthan, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2158/18/25] 
(iv)
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
3

 
(AIIMS), Patna, Bihar, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2166/18/25]  
 
 (v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Bilaspur, Himanchal Prades h, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2163/18/25]  
 
 (vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Kalyani, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2159/18/25]  
 
 (vii) (a) Fifth Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), Deoghar, Jharkhan d, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2165/18/25]  
 
 (viii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Awantipora, U.T. of Jammu & Kashmir, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2155/18/25]  
 
 (ix) (a) Sixth Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), Raebareli, Utta r Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2160/18/25]  
 
 (x) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Rajkot, Gujarat, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2157/18/25]  
 
 (xi) (a) Twelfth Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), Bhubaneswar, Odis ha, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2164/18/25]  
 
 (xii) (a) Twelfth Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS), Bhopal, Madhya  Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2156/18/25]  
 
(B)  (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (4) of the Section 19 and Section 20 of  the National Institute of Mental Health 
and Neuro-Sciences (NIMHANS) Act 2012: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2161/18/25]  
 
Notification of the Ministry of Communications 
 
THE   MINISTER   OF   ST ATE   IN   THE   MINISTRY    OF   COMMUNICATIONS  
(DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI):  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English 
and Hindi) of the Ministry of Communicat ions (Department of Telecommunications) 
Notification No. RG-13/1/(1)/2023-ADV_FEA-I., dated the 24 thDecember, 2024, 
publishing the  Telecom  Consumers  Protec tion  (Twelfth Amendment) Regulations, 
2024, under Section 37 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2173/18/25]  
 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
5

 
Notifications of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH):  Sir, I lay on the Table— 
I. (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, under Section 26 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986:- 
(1)  G.S.R. 787(E)., dated the 30
th December, 2024, publishing the 
Environment (Protection) Third Amendment Rules, 2024. 
(2)  G.S.R. 70(E)., dated the 22 nd January, 2025, publishing the Environment 
(Protection) Amendment Rules, 2025. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see No. L.T. 2214/18/25] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Notification No. S.O. 441(E)., dated the 24 th January, 2025, constituting the 
Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevent ion and Control) Authority, and its 
specifications, issued under sub-sectio ns (1) and (3) of Section 3 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2215/18/25] 
 
 
Report and Accounts (2023-24) of ESIC, New Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) :  Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Sushri Shobha Karandlaje, I lay on the Table:— 
 
(1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under Section 36 of 
the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948: - 
 (a) Annual Report of the Employees’ St ate Insurance Corporation (ESIC), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon. 
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2081/18/25]  
 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE WAQF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI (Maharashtra ): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in 
English and Hindi) of the Report * of the Joint Committee on  the Waqf (Amendment) 
Bill, 2024. 
RECORD OF EVIDENCE OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON 
 THE WAQF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI (Maharashtra) : Sir, I lay on th e Table, a copy of 
the record of evidence given before the Joint Committee on the Waqf (Amendment) 
Bill, 2024. 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE NATIONAL TIGER CONSERVATION 
AUTHORITY 
T H E   M I N I S T E R    O F    E N V I R O N M E N T ,    F O R E S T    A N D    C L I M A T E    C H A N G E  
(SHRI BHUPENDER YADAV): Sir, I move the following Motion:— 
“That in pursuance of clause  (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 38L of the Wild Life
 
(Protection) Act, 1972 (No.53 of 1972) , as amended in 2006, this House do 
proceed to elect, in the manner as direct ed by the Chairman , one Member from 
amongst the Members of the House to be a member of the National Tiger 
Conservation Authority.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PAC) 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Dr. L. Murugan to move a Motion for nomination of seven 
Members to the Committee on public Accounts.* 
* The Report was presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 30 th January, 2025 under Direction 71 A (1) of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha when the House was not in Session and the Speaker was
pleased to order the printing, publication and circul ation of the Report under Rule 280 of the  Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
* The
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
7

 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion:- ...(Interruptions)... 
 
“That this House concurs in the reco mmendation of the Lok Sabha that the 
Rajya Sabha do agree to nominate seven Members from Rajya Sabha to associate 
with the Committee on Public Accounts for the term beginning on the 1st May, 2025 
and ending on the 30th April, 2026, and do  proceed to elect, in such manner as 
directed by the Chairman, seven Members from amongst the Members of the House 
to serve on the said Committee.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (CoPU) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. L. Murugan to move a Motion for nomination of seven Members 
to the Committee on Public Undertakings. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion:- ...(Interruptions)... 
 
“That this House concurs in the reco mmendation of the Lok Sabha that the 
Rajya Sabha do agree to nominate seven Members from Rajya Sabha to associate 
with the Committee on Public Undertakings for the term beginning on the 1st May, 
2025 and ending on the 30th April, 2026, and do proceed to elect, in such manner as 
directed by the Chairman, seven Members from amongst the Members of the House 
to serve on the said Committee.” 
 
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF 
SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES (SCs & STs) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. L. Murugan to move a Motion  for nomination to the Committee 
on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. ...(Interruptions)... 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion:- ...(Interruptions)... 
 
“That this House resolves that the Rajy a Sabha do join the Committee of both 
the Houses on the Welfare of Scheduled Ca stes and Scheduled Tribes for the term 
beginning on the 1st May, 2025 and ending on the 30th April, 2026, and do proceed to 
elect, in accordance with the system of prop ortional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote, ten Members fr om amongst the Members of the House to 
serve on the said Committee.” 
 
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
 
 
PRESIDENT’S MESSAGE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, a Message from the hon. President. 
...(Interruptions)...Take your seats. I am reading a Message from the hon. President 
of India. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, a Message from the President of India 
must receive due deference, due respect. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): We are giving, 
but,...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask your Members. This is not respect. This is disrespect to the 
President of India. This is disrespect to th e first tribal woman wh o is the President of 
India. ...(Interruptions)... T a k e  y o u r  s e a t s .  L e t  m e  r e a d  o u t  t h e  M e s s a g e .  
...(Interruptions)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... I appeal to your good sense... 
...(Interruptions)... I appeal to you, don’t show disrespect to the President of India. 
...(Interruptions)... We should respect the President of India, the first tribal woman 
to hold the position. ...(Interruptions)... Ask your Members. ...(Interruptions)... 
Hon Leader of the Opposition, let us listen to the Message of the President. She is the 
first citizen of the country, the first tribal woman ever to hold this post. 
...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats. Please take your seats. 
...(Interruptions)... Don't disrespect. I will name you. I would name the Members 
now. ...(Interruptions)... I will not overlook or counten ance disrespect to the hon. 
President.    I    appeal    to    the   Leader  of  the    Opposition. ...(Interruptions)...  
Please take your seats. You are showin g disrespect to the hon. President… 
...(Interruptions)...  The House is adjourned to meet at 11.20 a.m. 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
9

 
The House then adjourned at ten minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled at twenty minutes past eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Message from the hon. President of India. ...(Interruptions)... 
Please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Hon. Members, I have received  the following message dated 12 th February, 
2025, from the hon. President: 
 
 “I have received the expression of Thanks by the Members of 
Rajya Sabha for the Address which I delivered to both Houses of 
Parliament assembled together on 31st January, 2025.” 
 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat. You have been here enough.  Do you want 
me to take the ultimate action? Take your seat. ...(Interruptions)...  You are forcing 
me. You are not only forcing, the conseque nces are severe. Please take your seat. 
Persuade him. ...(Interruptions)... Someone should persuade him. 
...(Interruptions)...  I get your point.  I hereby name... ...(Interruptions)... I am 
about to name both of you. I think, good sense would prevail.  Listen to the Leader of 
the Opposition.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: पहले सभापित महोदय राÍटर्पित जी का मैसेज पढ़ लȂ, उसके  बाद आप 
अपनी बात रेज़ किरएगा।  …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, Sir. I am grateful to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have to inform Member s that the Business Advisory Committee in 
its meeting held on the 11 th February, 2025, recommended the following Ministries for 
discussion on their working during the second part of the current Session. The 
Ministries are Home Affairs, Education,  Railways and Health  & Family Welfare.  
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, it was further decided that the fifth Ministry, if to 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
be taken up for discussion, will be finalized in due course. ...(Interruptions)...  The 
Committee also recommended that lunch hour may be skipped and the House may 
sit late on the days when the Discussion on the Working of Ministries is taken up, to 
allow more participation from Members. ...(Interruptions)...Zero Hour, Shri Pramod 
Tiwari. ...(Interruptions)... One minute.  Take your seats. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
REGARDING DISORDER IN THE HOUSE AND POSITION OF DISSENT NOTES IN 
REPORTS OF SELECT COMMMITTEES 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, Rule 267 का नोिटस था। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं था। You are not aware.  ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, one 
minute.  First, you take your seat. What is this? ...(Interruptions)... Leader of the 
House, have you got anything to say on this? ...(Interruptions)... Go to your seats.  
Leader of the House is speaking. ...(Interruptions)... First go to your seat. You 
should learn some basic manners. Go to your seat. Don’t think you are law unto 
yourself. You are ridiculing the position of Member of Parliament. ...(Interruptions)... 
आप संसद सदÎय होने का अपमान कर रहे हȅ। ...(Interruptions)...  Now, Leader of the 
House. 
  
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सभापित जी, संसद क े अंदर वा
 द-िववाद, िवषयȗ क े बारे मȂ 
चचार् और Ģजातंतर् क े अंदर हम एक बात मानते हȅ िक We agree to disagree. ...( Ëयवधान)... 
इसिलए चचार् और चचार् क े साथ-साथ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing except what the Leader of  the House is saying will go on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: लेिकन हमȂ परंपराओं का ध्यान रखना चािहए और परंपराओं को ध्यान 
रखते हुए, संवैधािनक Ģा
वधान क े तहत, Ģजातांितर्क तरीके  से हाउस की Ģोसीिंडग्स को चलाना 
चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे यह बताते हुए दुख है और खेद है िक आपकी बारÇबार िरक्वेÎट क े 
बाद, in spite of your repeated req
uests that the House shou ld come to order so that, 
at least, महामिहम राÍटर्पित, दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी का मैसेज आप यहाँ पर, इस हाउस मȂ सही 
वातावरण मȂ रख सकȂ । ...(Ëयवधान)... लेिकन, िवपक्ष ने िजस तरीके  की भूिमका अदा की है, वह 
बहुत ही गैर-िजÇमेदाराना है, irresponsible है और उसकी िज तनी भी िंनदा की जाए, वह कम है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ ऑन िरकॉडर् कहना चाहता हूँ िक राÍटर्पित महोदया, first citizen of the 
country, जब उनका मैसेज पढ़ा जाए, तब हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ होना चािहए था, जो नहीं है। 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
11

 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह बहुत ही दुभार्ग्यपूणर् है। यह मȅ जरूर  कहना चाहूँगा िक हाउस इसकी िंनदा 
करता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Leader of the Opposition, I would urge you to request the Members 
to go to their seats so that they can listen to you and the House comes in order. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, when the 
Leader of the House spoke in the same status,… ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Leader of the House does  not have control over the 
Opposition. If his Members were here, I would have asked him not to speak and 
control them.  ...(Interruptions )... On a point of principle, I have indicated, on 
numerous occasions, if a Member of Council of States walks into the Well of the 
House, which, at the moment, are Shri  Samirul Islam, Shri Mohammed Nadimul 
Haque and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla ...( Interruptions)... These three hon. 
Members have created chaos in the House, disruption in the House and disturbance 
in the House, and I will be constrained to take extreme step.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI  MALLIKARJUN  KHARGE: Sir, I want to speak ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Only the three of you are here. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: आप एक िमनट क े िलए बैिठए, then again, you can come. 
...(Interruptions)... मेरे एक िमनट बोलने क े बाद, िफर आप ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I will continue wit
h the Agenda and you keep on  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Sir, one minute. ...( Interruptions)... मेरे एक िमनट 
बोलने क े बाद आप जो भी ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No; everyone has to be on the seat. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: Ãलीज़, मेरे को एक िमनट का समय दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान).
 .. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Everyone has to be on the seat. Please take your seats. 
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: They are taking. ...(Interruptions)... मȅ एक िमनट बोल 
लेता हूँ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Take your seats. I am sure that stairs are not your seats. Take your 
seats. 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Sir, don’t treat us like this again and again. What is 
this? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: सर, आपको गुÎसा नहीं आना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI  MALLIKARJUN  KHARGE: We are Members of Parliament. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपको गुÎसा आएगा, तो मुझे परेशानी होगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : We should not be treated like this.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Tiruchiji, you are a senior Member. Ask everyone to take their seats 
so that the hon. Leader of the Oppositi on can be heard with rapt attention. 
  
...(Interruptions)...  I will allow everyone to express their views.  This is a House for 
debate, dialogue, discussion and deliberatio n .   E v e r y o n e  s h o u l d  t a k e  t h e i r  s e a t s .  
And, let me remind this House that when  Shrimati Sonia Gandhi made her maiden 
address, I ensured there was pin-drop silence. I want pin-drop silence when the 
Leader of the Opposition speaks, and I equally want pin-drop  silence when any 
Member speaks. That is the only way we conduct ourselves.  So, my prayer to you is:  
I will allow the Members to express themselves  on two conditions.  One is that they 
have to speak from their seats, and number tw o is that the House has to be in order.  
I hope the House is with me on this poin t. Now, please listen to the Leader of the 
Opposition in rapt attention.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: धन्यवाद, सर।  आपने हमȂ जो सलाह दी, वह ठीक है, हम उसे मानते हȅ, 
लेिकन इस तरीके  को अगर उधर वाले भी मान जायȂ, तो मȅ समझता हूं िक नƿा साहब अपने 
मेÇबसर् को क ंटर्ोल मȂ रखȂगे। ...( Ëयवधा
न)... हमारा एक ही िवषय है। वक्फ बोडर् की जेपीसी की जो 
िरपोटर् है, उसमȂ अनेक सदÎयȗ ने अपना dissent note िदया है। Dissent note देने क े बावजूद भी 
उसे Ģोसीिंडग्स से िनकालना और िसफर् उन मैजोिरटी मेÇबसर् क े Ëयूज़ उसमȂ रखकर बुलडोज़ 
करना ठीक नहीं है। यह condemnable है , anti-democrati
c और anti-procedure है। दूसरी 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
13

 
चीज़, बाहर से non-stakeholders बुला-बुलाकर, उनको खड़ा करके , उनके  ÎटेटमȂट ले रहे हȅ।  
पािर्लयामȂट मȂ इतने मेÇबसर् ने िजन्हȗने dissent note िदए हȅ, क्या उनमȂ कोई पढ़ा-िलखा नहीं है, 
क्या िकसी ने वक्फ बोडर् एक्ट नहीं पढ़ा है? मुझे बहुत ताज् जुब हो रहा है। अगर आपको क ु छ 
करना भी है, तो आपको dissent note क े Ëयूज़ को िंĢट कराकर या अपनी िरपोटर् मȂ डालकर 
बताना चािहए। इसके  बजाय, उसको िडलीट करके  अगर कोई िरपोटर् बनती है, तो मȅ उसको 
condemn करता हूं। हम ऐसी £ िरपोटर् को कभी नहीं मानȂगे और सदन भी कभी नहीं मानेगा।  
...(Ëयवधान)... जब Ģोसीजर फॉलो नहीं होता है, तो वह इस हाउस का पाटर् नहीं बन सकता है।  
इसीिलए मȅ आपसे िवनती कर रहा हूं िक उनको डायरेक्शन्स दीिजए िक जो भी िरपोटर् आई है, 
अगर उस िरपोटर् मȂ dissent views नहीं हȅ, तो उसको वा
िपस भेिजए, उसे िनकाल दीिजए।  
उसके  बाद आप एक बार और पुनिर्वचार करके , उन सभी dissent views को उसमȂ डालकर पेश 
कीिजए। िफर आगे क्या होता है, हम देख लȂगे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let him conclude. He is on his legs. ...(Interrupt
ions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: दूसरी बात, सर, मेÇबसर् एिजटेट क्यȗ होते हȅ?  यह कोई उनके  घर का 
सवाल नहीं है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...आप बैिठए, आप बहुत कोटर् वाले हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: सर, आप इधर देिखए। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, यह िक
 सी individual का सवाल नहीं है। मेÇबसर् जो एिजटेट कर    रहे     
हȅ, तो वे ऐसा  अपने िलए नहीं  कर रहे हȅ। पूरे समाज िजनके  ऊपर अन्याय हो रहा है, उस अन्याय 
क े िखलाफ वे ĢोटेÎट कर रहे हȅ।  ...( Ëयवधान)... यह देश क े िलए भी ठीक है, क्यȗिक we 
wanted a united all-inclusive growth और  देश पीसफु ल रहे, यह हम सभी चा
हते हȅ और 
उसके  िलए हम आपकी मदद भी कर रहे हȅ। अगर आप संिवधान क े िवरुǉ ऐसी चीज़Ȃ करते हȅ, तो 
ऐसी ही गड़बड़ होती है और िफर लोग ĢोटेÎट करȂगे।   
 मȅ नƿा साहब से िवनती करता हूं, क्यȗिक नƿा साहब पहले क े मेÇबसर् और लीडसर् क े 
मुकाबले कम से कम पीसफु ली सुनते हȅ। मȅ एक-दूसरे का मुकाबला नहीं कर रहा हूं।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: सर, आप ही कहते हȅ िक he is not a Member of this House.
 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, वह ठीक है, मगर कभी-कभी याद िदलाना पड़ता है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: ठीक है, सर। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  जैसे आप इितहास मȂ राम, िवकर्मािदत्य आिद का िजकर् करते हȅ... 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
    
Ǜी सभापित: क ृÍण का। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: मȅ उनको यह बोल रहा हूँ िक आप ĢेिसडȂट भी हȅ, इसमȂ आपका influence 
जरूरी है। आप इसको withdraw किरए। यह unconstitutional है, इसीिलए आप इसको िफर से 
जेपीसी को भेिजए। सर, आप इसको place करने क े िलए refuse कर सकते हȅ। िकतने गवनर्सर् ने 
Bills refuse करके  वािपस भेजे हȅ। सर, हर Îटेट मȂ गवनर्र छोटे-छोटे reason से, जो संबंिधत 
नहीं है, िबल को वािपस भेजते हȅ।     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have mad
e your point.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: इसीिलए मȅ बोलता हूँ िक आप उन dissent notes को िफर से िरपोटर् मȂ 
डािलए I तब तक आप इसको वािपस भेिजए। आपको ऐसा करना चा
िहए, मȅ आपसे िवनती करता 
हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, hon. Leader of the Opposition.   
 
THE MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI 
BHUPENDER YADAV): Sir, I am on a point of order. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, ...(Ëयवधान)... एक सेक ंड।  माननीय सदÎयगण, 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... एक सेक ंड।  माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ सदन का आभारी हूँ िक आपने Ģितपक्ष क े 
नेता को सुना, क्यȗिक यह सदन अनंतवाद का एक बहुत बड़ा सभागार है। जब कोई िवचार Ëयƪ 
करता है, तो िवचार सुने जाते हȅ। आपने िजतनी शांित से Ģितपक्ष क े नेता को सुना, उसी शांित 
और शालीन
ता से हमȂ अन्य वƪाओं को भी सुनना चािहए। आज सदन मȂ संबंिधत मंतर्ी भी हȅ, हम 
एक बार उनकी बात सुन लȂ। ...(Ëयवधा न)...   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal) : Sir, we are the second  largest party in the 
Opposition. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Saket, everyone will get space.  …(Interruptions)… The Leader 
of the Opposition has raised some issues.  …(Interruptions)…  We, at the moment, 
have the hon. Minister, Shri Bhupender Yadav.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, floor leaders must be given the opportunity.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
15

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. …(Interruptions)…  Bhupender ji, after the hon. Leaders, … 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI BHUPENDER YADAV: Sir, I am on a point of order. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no.  Bhupender ji, the House is in order; so, no point of order.  
Please take your seat. …(Interruptions)… The House is in order.  …(Interruptions)…  
Yes, Mr. Tiruchi Siva. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, I would like to draw your kind attention to Rule 274 - ‘Report 
of the Committee’.  It says, “Any Member of the Committee may record a minute of 
dissent on the Report of the Committee, an d the Report of the Committee, together 
with the minutes of dissent, if any, shall be presented to the Houses.”   W e  a r e  
deviating from that rule, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Just a minute, Mr. Siva.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, let me complete.    …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I am myself fully aware of it.  If you examine the 
rules, you will find that Rule 91 re garding ‘Presentation of Report’ says, “…but there 
shall be no discussion at this stage.”   I deviated from that.  …(Interruptions)…  One 
minute, Tiruchi Siva ji.  …(Interruptions)…  I deviated from the procedure, knowing full 
well that we cannot allow a debate at the stage of presentation. But looking at the 
mood of the House and yielding to expedi ency that this is a House for positive 
dialogue, I allowed the Leader of the Opposi tion. Rather than being technical, let us 
go ahead.  …(Interruptions)…  Even the hon. Minister, Shri Bhupender Yadav, wanted 
to raise a point of order.  I am fully alive to the rules.  Rule 91 generates a constraint 
on me, Ram Gopalji, that at the stage of pr esentation, a discussion is not allowed.  
Seeing the mood of the House and to en sure our accountability to the people, I 
allowed it. हमारा उǄरदाियत्व जनता की तरफ है, साथर्क चचार् हो। अगर आप इस िवषय पर 
क ु छ कहना चाहते हȅ, तो किहए।  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, we seek your protection.  …(Interruptions)… You are the 
custodian not only of this House...  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please go ahead and make your co
ntribution.   …(Interruptions)… 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: You hold the second-h ighest office in the country. We work 
under the Constitution and the rules as well as the rulings given either by you or the 
earlier Chairmen. How can we deviate from that?  If a Member of the Committee does 
not agree with the Committee’s recommendatio ns, he is allowed to give a dissent 
note. That dissent note should accompan y the Report, which is submitted to the 
Parliament. The Reports in the past have  accompanied such dissent notes. Now, 
why should those dissent notes be remove d, and how is the Chairman of that 
Committee entrusted with that power? You ha ve to come to our rescue, protect the 
rules and ensure smooth functioning of the House. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have taken note of it. Sanjay, you and some Members have made 
a presentation to me also. ..(Interruptions).. This is receiving my attention.  Anything 
more?  Be only to the point.   
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): सर, आपने मुझे अपना पक्ष रखने का जो मौका 
िदया है, उसके  िलए बहुत आभार। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: पक्ष नहीं, इस िवषय पर किहए। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, मȅ इस पूरी िरपोटर् मȂ जेपीसी का मȂबर हूँ।  मȅ आपसे बड़ी भी िवन
 Ħतापूवर्क 
यह बताना चाहता हूं िक हमने अपना पक्ष रखा। हमारे पक्ष से आप सहमत हो सकते हȅ, असहमत 
हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन उसको क ू ड़ेदान मȂ क ै से डाल सकते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, एक िमनट।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  आप मȂबसर् को तो बोलने दीिजए। सर, िव
िवधता मȂ एकता, भारत की िवशेषता 
है।  यहाँ अलग-अलग धमर् क े लोगȗ को अपनी-अपनी धािर्मक मान्यताओं क े िहसाब से पूजा, 
अचर्ना और उपासना करने की छू ट है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: यह बात तो आप कह चुक े हȅ। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंस
ह: आज आप वक्फ की संपिǄयȗ पर कÅजा कर रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: ठीक है। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: कल गुरुǎारा की करȂगे, िफर मंिदर की करȂगे और िफर चचर् की करȂगे। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay, fine.  Thank you.  ..(Interruptions)..  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
17

 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: िंहदुÎतान मȂ धािर्मक Îथलȗ की ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Bhupender Yadav.  ..( Interruptions).. आप बैिठए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... First hear the Minister.  ..( Interruptions).. I will allow the hon. 
Minister.  ..(Interruptions)… And look at me.  
 
 Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सर, मȅ point of order raise करना चाहता हूं। सदन मȂ दो िवषय कह गए हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... पहले तो, ितरुची  िशवा जी हमारे सीिनयर सदÎय हȅ।  उन्हȗ ने Rule 274 quote 
िकया। ...( Ëयवधान)... Rule 274 is related with the Standing Committee. लेिकन, 
पािर्लयामȂट मȂ Select Committee का जो procedure है, वह Rule 72 से लेकर Rule 90 तक मȂ 
िदया गया है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  रूÊस Rule 72 से लेकर  ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Yes, Leader of the House.  ..(Interruptions).. Kharge ji, I need 
your protection. He is speaking.  Make everyone listen to him.   
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Now, I reques t the Leader of Opposition to ensure 
that the House is in order and the Member s of the Opposition are in their places.  
Then the House should continue.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Take your seats. ...( Interruptions)… Hon. Members, I will be 
constrained,… ...( Interruptions)... Before the House, as it has proceeded today, I 
may take serious steps, severe steps.  …( Interruptions)... Would you like to say 
something, Bhupender ji?  Go ahead.   
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सर, Select Committee का procedure Rule 72 से लेकर Rule 92 तक मȂ 
िदया गया है, िजसमȂ Chairman की powers Rule 90 क े sub-Rule 7 क े sub-Rule (1) मȂ दी 
गई हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: यह आप क्या कर रहे हȅ?  ...(Ëयवधान)... Listen to him.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सर, मȅ sub-Rule 7 का sub-Rule (1) पढ़ रहा हूं, िजसमȂ Chairman को  
power देकर यह िलखा गया है िक "If in the opinion of the Chairman o
 f the Committee, a 
minute of dissent contains words, phrases or expressions which are unparliamentary, 
irrelevant or otherwise inappropriate, he may order such words, phrases or 
expressions to be expunged from the minute of dissent." यह power तो Rules मȂ दी हुई 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)...यह जो Rules की power है, ये आपके  समय क े बने हुए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
सर, जब Rules क े अंदर power है, उसके  बाद यह िरपोटर् है, तो यह िरपोटर् तो part of the 
house है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  जब िरपोटर् यहां पर आए, तो ये उस पर चचार् कर सकते हȅ, परन्तु 
यह नहीं कह सकते हȅ िक Chairman ने पािर्लयामȂट की power का जो इÎतेमाल िकया, वह गलत 
तरीके  से िकया।  ...(Ëयव
धान)... वह जो Rules की power है, ‘Inappropriate’ may be 
anything.   ...(Interruptions )... उनका अपना reason है।   हमने उनको powers िदय े हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  इसिलए िवपक्ष क े ǎारा यह जो िवषय उठाया जा रहा है, यह पूरे तरीके  से गलत 
है, तथ्यहीन है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इस िरपोटर् को Rules क े िहसाब से तैयार िक या गया है।  अब 
अगर ये disturbance करना चाहȂ, तो यह उनकी मजीर् है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIR S; AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU) : As per the listed Business, the JPC Report on Waqf 
(Amendment) Bill was to be placed on the Table of the House. I have just checked 
some of the concerns raised by the Opposition parties. There is no deletion, there is 
no removal of any part of the Report.  Everything is tabled on the floor of the House. 
On what basis, can you raise this kind of an issue? Don’t mislead the House. Sir, I am 
very pained to say that the hon. Member s from Opposition parties are making 
unnecessary issues by raising an issue which is not a fact. The allegation is false. 
…(Interruptions)…  The JPC has conducted the entire proceedings as per the rules.  
There is no violation of any rule. All the Members from the Opposition parties 
participated in the proceedings of the JPC in the last six months. …(Interruptions)…  
Finally, when the Report is placed on th e floor of the House, they are raising 
objections.  …(Interruptions)… In the Appendix also, all the dissent notes have been 
attached. All the dissent notes of the opposi tion parties have also been attached and 
placed on the record of the House.  …(Interruptions)…  They cannot mislead the 
House in this manner. This is very unfortunate, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Memb ers, take your seat. …(Interruptions)… Will you keep 
quiet?  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, the hon. Minister has, in categorical terms, 
stated that
 no part of dissent or any input by a Member ha s been deleted. The 
statements made in the House constitute an act of impropriety. …(Interruptions)… The 
Minister has made a categorical statement.  …(Interruptions)… If you think on the 
contrary, take recourse to Rules. …(Interruptions)…  Such a categorical statement… 
…(Interruptions)…  A responsible Minister, the Pa rliamentary Affairs Minister, has 
categorically referred in this House to th e Report. He has focussed that no part of 
dissent, no part of input, as be ing alleged, has been deleted.  …(Interruptions)…  
Therefore, all that has been said, according to the hon. Minister, is factually 
untenable.  …(Interruptions)…  It is untruth.  …(Interruptions)…  We cannot allow this 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
19

 
House to set afloat untruths.  …(Interruptions)… The Minister is categorical.  
…(Interruptions)… I find that there is an effort to  make this House dysfunctional. The 
Minister has categorically asserted it.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing has gone on 
record.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Finance Minister. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, the Minister has said it categorically and 
then the clarification of th e rule is very clear.  …(Interruptions)… But we are being 
misled in this House as though there is a wrong thing. The Minister, in your presence, 
is saying the truth. They don’t even want to look… …(Interruptions)… Here is a 
Member who says, ‘How does the Minister know?’ Isn’t the Minister a Member of this 
House? …(Interruptions)…  What is this?  …(Interruptions)…  This is misleading of the 
House by hon. Members who are supposed to be familiar with the rules.  It is 
outrageous. 
 
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU: After th e observations made by the hon. Chairman, there is 
nothing left to be clarified.  However, the hon. Member, Shri Abdulla, has just made a 
remark which Finance Minister has resp onded to appropriately.  He says, ”How does 
the Minister know? ” Not only being the Parliamentar y Affairs Minister, but the Waqf 
Amendment Bill is also related to the Ministry which I am handling.  It is the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs.  …(Interruptions)… From day one, every assistance has been 
provided. I want to ask:   During the proceedings in the last six months…  
…(Interruptions)… Some of the hon. Members are here who are the Members of the 
JPC.  …(Interruptions)…   They can clarify it from the Mini stry of Minority Affairs.  Is 
there any lack of support, absence of support from the Ministry?  …(Interruptions)…  I 
believe my own Secretary of th e Ministry of Minority Affair s continuously attended the 
JPC meeting. All the offi cers are supporting them.  The proceedings were as per the 
rules.  …(Interruptions)…   And finally, when the Report is tabled, it would be in the 
fitness of thing that hon. Members read th e Report. And then raise any issue at the 
time when the Bill is reintroduced again by the Government. ...( Interruptions)... 
Right now, JPC report has been tabled. Wh at is there to make such a hue and cry 
about tabling, which is a procedure?  ...( Interruptions)... It is a normal procedure. 
Those who are raising issues are also Member s of JPC.  They are discrediting their 
own efforts. संजय िंसह जी, आप तो खुद मेÇबर हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान).
 ..  सर, ये खुद जेपीसी क े 
मेÇबर हȅ और अपनी ही िरपोटर् का िवरोध कर रहे हȅ, यह िकतने अफसोस की बात है! 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : May I now allow Zero Hour? ...( Interruptions)... Shri Pramod 
Tiwari, would you like to raise it?  ...( Interruptions)... They have to go to their seats. 
...(Interruptions).. First you go to your seat. ...(Interruptions )... Yes, Mr. Naseer. 
...(Interruptions)...Secondly, they also have to go to their seats. ...(Interruptions)... 
खरगे जी, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... पहले आप सब लोग Îथान गर्हण कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
मेरा आपसे अनुरोध है िक जब हम हाउस को शालीनता से चला सकते हȅ और  दो या तीन सदÎय 
यहां आकर जो आचरण कर रहे हȅ, वह िंचतन का िवषय है। ...(Ëय वधान)...  वे एवरीटाइम यहां 
आते हȅ, वे क्या िदखाना चाहते हȅ? आिखर, यह जो हो रहा है, इससे पूरा राÍटर् जुड़ा हुआ है।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  आप बैठȂगे?  यह एक ऐसा मुǈा है, िजस पर लोगȗ क े 
अनेक मत हȗ
गे, अनेक िवचारधाराएं हȗगी और यह सदन उन िवचारधाराओं का संगम बनेगा।  यह 
सदन अंत मȂ जो िनणर्य करेगा, वह Ģजातांितर्क ËयवÎथा क े िहसाब से होगा, वाद-िववाद क े 
िहसाब से होगा। ...(Ëय
वधान)...  एक सेक ंड। ...( Ëयवधान)...   Mr. Saket, I will come to you. 
मेरा आप लोगȗ से अनुरोध है िक आप सभी सदन क े सÇमािनत सदÎय हȅ, आप सबको इस बात का 
बोध है िक ज्वाइंट पािर्लयामȂटर्ी किमटी की जो िरपोटर् है, उसकी अहिमयत क्या है। अंत मȂ, वह 
सदन क े समक्ष आती है और समय क े ऊपर सदन मȂ वाद-िव
वाद होगा, िवचार-िवमशर् होगा, मंथन 
होगा और यिद उसमȂ एकसमानता नहीं आएगी, तो एक िविधक Ģिकर्या क े अनुसार उस पर िनणर्य 
होगा। वह िनणर्य वैल मȂ आने से नहीं होगा, slogan shouting से नह
ीं होगा, बिÊक वह िनणर्य 
आपके  िवचारȗ की ताकत से होगा िक आप एक-दूसरे को िकतना persuade कर सकते हȅ।  
आिखर मȂ, Ģजातांितर्क ËयवÎथा मȂ जो पǉित है, िजस पǉित क े आध ार पर सरकार का िनमार्ण 
होता है, उसी पǉित से िनणर्य होगा।   मेरा यह कहना है िक अब इस िवषय क े ऊपर आगे न बढ़ा 
जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... ज़ीरो ऑवर, Ģमोद जी, आप बोलȂगे? ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, आपने नािसर जी का नाम िलया था। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप पहले बैिठए।  मȅने नािसर जी का भी नाम िलया है और साके त जी का भी नाम 
िलया है और मेरा दोनȗ से अनुरोध रहेगा, ...(Ëयवधान)... साके त जी, बैिठए।    
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, let me have one minute. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, मुझे सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
एक बार बैिठए।  In order to facilitate smooth functi oning of the House, I will give brief 
opportunity to Mr. Naseer and Mr. Sa ket and then take up the Business. 
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Naseer, one minute.  ...( Interruptions)... Okay, you don’t 
want it! ...( Interruptions)... Ask him to sit and not to rise till I ask him to rise. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN (Karnataka) : Sir, I cannot do that. …(Interruptions)… 
Anyway, …(Interruptions)…  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
21

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Then, if you want me to act, I can. …(Interruptions)… Go ahead. 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: Sir, I want to make it very clear. The Minister of 
Minority Affairs is misleading this House. …(Interruptions)… I want to put it on record  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, after him…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN : I want to put it on record, my own dissent note, 
introductory part, covering letter and conc lusion of my dissent note have been 
redacted. It is there in public domain, it was in Whatsapp.  I can…  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You can take recourse to law. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN : That I will authenticate . …(Interruptions)… Sir, I will 
authenticate it. Number one.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Write to me, I will take note of it.  
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN : Yes, that is number one. Number two, in the JPC, 
non-stakeholders were called. Minutes of meetings were not given, responses of 
witnesses were not provided, presentation s were not provided, discussion among 
JPC Members was not done, key issues like conflict of opinions amongst judges were 
not taken up. Key witnesses were not called an d dissent note was redacted. 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Okay, Write to me. …(Interruptions)… Mr. Saket, one minute. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN : That is why we say, this Report is not complete. यह 
िरपोटर् 
£ है, इसको वापस करना चािहए, िबÊकु ल वापस करना चािहए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Okay, fine. …(Interruptions)… Shri Saket, one minute. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, my limited point here, within one minute  
is…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, good. I am glad; limited focus point. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, my limited point. This is not a religious issue. This is a 
constitutional issue. Now, Sir, I would like to request, because the hon. Minister, Mr. 
Bhupender Yadav, read a point of order and then …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No point of order. …(Interruptions)… The House is in order. Go 
ahead. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: While speaking about redactions in the dissent note that has 
been raised, the Minister said that dissent  notes have been annexed. I would like to 
ask on record:  Whether half-half pages of  dissent notes have been redacted, calling 
them unparliamentary? That is unconstitutional, that is censorship, Sir. 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fine, good. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: The Minister should respond if any redaction has been done 
of the dissent note. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. Now the hon. Minster.  And mind you, it is for the first time in 
the history of this country that a Buddhist is a Minority Affairs Minister. Am I right?  
 
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU: Thank you, Sir. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: A matter of pride to the entire global community. Now, the hon. 
Minority Affairs Minister, also the Parliamentary Affairs Minister; a pointed reply. 
…(Interruptions)…  He is a Buddhist of global reputation. …(Interruptions)… After him. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, मेरा यह कहना है ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  Mr. John, you know , I compensate. Take your seat 
…(Interruptions)…  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
23

 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal): Sir,  …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are one of the ve ry polite Members in Chamber.  
…(Interruptions)… Then, be a polite Member here also. He is also a good friend of 
mine but agitated today. …(Interruptions)… Yes, go ahead. Only the hon. Minister of 
Minority Affairs. 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, नॉमर्ली जब जेपीसी की िरपोटर् table होती है, अगर उसमȂ क ु छ खािमयां 
हȅ - तो आपने कहा है िक उसके  बारे मȂ मेÇबसर् को क ु छ रेज़ करना है, तो वे रूÊस क े िहसाब से रेज़ 
कर सकते हȅ। नॉमर्ली जेपीसी िरपोटर् table करने क े समय चचार् नहीं होती है। चचार् का समय बाद 
मȂ आएगा, उसके  बारे मȂ मुझे अभी बताने की ज़रूर
त नहीं है। मȅने categorically इस  बात को 
बताया िक जब जेपीसी की िरपोटर् Table हुई, तब यहां क ु छ सदÎयȗ ने objection रेज़ िकया िक 
शायद इसमȂ से क ु छ पाटर् काट िदया गया है। मȅ बाहर गया, िफर चेयरमैन साहब से बात की 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप सुिनए ...(Ëय वधान)... ये क्या बात कर रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ यह 
कहना चाहता हूं िक मȅने बाहर जाकर चेयरमैन साहब से भी confirm िकया और Secretariat से 
भी confirm िकया िक रूÊस क े मुतािबक जेपीसी की पूरी िरपोटर् और साथ मȂ annexure को  भी 
िबना िकसी संशोधन क े, िबना िकसी काट-छांट क े table िक
या गया है ...(Ëयवधान)... उसके  बाद 
भी अगर इन लोगȗ को क ु छ िशकायत है, तो यह कोई तरीका नहीं होता है िक वे यहां हंगामा करȂ। 
आज चचार् का िवषय नहीं है। आज तो िरपोटर् को table करके  हम लोगȗ को अध्ययन करने क े िलए 
एक ज़िरया उपलÅध कराया है। जो िस
Îटम है, हम वह करȂगे।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now Shri Pramod Tiwari.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: ये क ै से कह सकते हȅ िक इसमȂ से क ु छ काट िदया गया है, on what basis?  
यह कहा गया िक जेपीसी मȂ िवट्नेसेज़ की अच्छे तरीके  से सुनवाई नहीं हुई है।  यह भी कहा गया 
िक और टाइम देना चािह
ए था। मȅ आज िजÇमेदारी क े साथ कह रहा हूं  …(Ëयव धान)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित: ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर क्वेÌचन  ऑवर। 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, िजतना जेपीसी ने वक्फ िबल पर काम िकया है  …(Ëयवधान)…  आज तक 
िकसी जेपीसी ने उतना काम नहीं िकया है।  …(Ëयवधान)…  
 
Ǜी सभापित: क्वेÌचन  ऑवर। 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: आप लोगȗ को जेपीसी क े चेयरमैन और सारे सदÎ
यȗ को  धन्यवाद देना 
चािहए।  …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, Question Hour.  Now, I take up the Question Hour 
and, I promised Dr. John Brittas, I will comp ensate him.  Question No. 91, Dr. John 
Brittas.    
 
DR. JOHB BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, this is not compensation. You should compensate 
while I am formulating the question.   
 
 
12.00 Noon 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS  
Release of Nimisha Priya from Yemen Jail 
 
*91.  DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Will the Minister of External Affairs be pleased to state: 
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has been making efforts to ensure that 
Nimisha Priya, who has been sentenced to death in Yemen, gets pardoned; 
(b) if so, the details and the progress thereof; 
(c) whether Government sought the good of fice of any other country in ensuring 
clemency for Nimisha Priya; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof?   
THE  MINISTER  OF  STATE  I N    T H E    M I N I S T R Y    O F    E X T E R N A L    A F F A I R S    
(SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN  SINGH): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the 
House. 
Statement 
(a) to (d) The Supreme Court of Yemen in  Sana’a had pronounced death sentence 
to Ms. Nimisha Priya, an Indian nurse, on  charges of murdering a Yemeni national. 
Government has received some representa tions, including from civil society, 
regarding the case of Ms. Nimisha Priya. Go vernment accords the highest priority for 
the welfare of Indians abroad and provides  all possible support to those who fall in 
distress including in the instant case. Gove rnment of India is providing all possible 
assistance in the case. The matter regarding any consideration towards the release of 
Ms. Nimisha Priya is between the family of the deceased and Ms. Nimisha Priya’s 
family.  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
25

 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I am literally shocked and taken aback by the answer given 
by the hon. Minister. …(Interruptions )… Sir, the Minister has said that the matter 
regarding the consideration of release of Ni misha Priya is a matter between the family 
of the deceased and Nimisha Priya's family.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
 
REGARDING DISORDER IN THE HOUSE AND POSITION OF DISSENT NOTES IN 
REPORTS OF SELECT COMMMITTEES- Contd. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सभापित महोदय, हम लोग वाक-आउट करते हȅ।  …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I know you would still walk out. …( Interruptions)… I know this.  
…(Interruptions)…  Yes, Jairam Ramesh ji, you know it more than I do.  Dr. John 
Brittas, one minute. Hon. Members, what really hurts me is that I made full 
opportunity available to the Opposition to put their stand.  Am I right, Bhupender ji?  
Full opportunities were given to them and th ere is no reason for them to walk away 
from their constitutional obligation. They are now   walking   out   from   the   House.    
And,   the   entire   nation is looking up to the Parliament to find  a resolution to this 
issue.  Dr. John Brittas, supplementary number one.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, thank you very much. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Leader of the House wants to say something.  Dr. John Brittas, 
yield as per directive. 
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सभापित महोदय, अभी िवपक्ष ने वॉकआउ
ट  िकया,  तो मȅ 
यह कहना चाहता हूं िक आज Ģात: से आपने पूरी तत्परता क े साथ िवपक्ष को पूरा मौका िदया।  
आपने यह भी चाहा िक जो उनके  िंबदु हȅ या जो उनकी कन्सन्सर् हȅ, वे सारे कन्सन्सर् चचार् मȂ आएं।  
क ु छ सदÎयȗ ने िनयमȗ को भी तोड़ा, उस पर भी आपने बहुत िदरयािदली िदखाते हुए यह Ģयास 
िकया िक उन पर कोई एक्शन न हो और उनको आपने वॉनर् िकया।  सारी चचार् मȂ एक बात ध्यान मȂ 
आई िक िव
पक्ष का उǈेÌय चचार् करना नहीं था, िवपक्ष का उǈेÌय राज नीितक दृिÍट से अपना 
Ãवाइंट Îकोर करने का था, यह बात ÎपÍट िदखती है। यह दुभार्ग्य की बात है, दुख की बात है िक 
िजसके  बारे मȂ पािर्लयमȂटरी अफे यसर् िमिनÎटर ने बड़े ÎपÍट शÅदȗ मȂ कहा िक िकसी भी चीज़ का 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
deletion नहीं हुआ है, िकसी भी चीज़ को िडलीट नहीं िकया गया है और अनेक्सचर मȂ सब क ु छ 
as it is रखा गया है। हमारे एक मंतर्ी ने ÎपÍट िकया िक चेयरमैन को यह अिधकार है िक वह क ु छ 
भी िडलीट कर सकता है। वह िनयम बताते हुए िक िकसी भी चीज़ का deletion हो सकता है, िफर 
भी क ु छ िडलीट नहीं िकया गया। िवपक्ष ने बहुत गैर-िजÇमेदाराना Ëयवहार िकया है और इसकी 
िंनदा होनी चािहए। यह तुÍटीकरण की राजनीित है।  This is a politics o
f appeasement.  यह 
देश को कमजोर करने क े िलए है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, this is the Question Hour. 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: जॉन िĤटास यह क्वेÌचन ऑवर जरूर  है, लेिकन  क्वेÌचन ऑवर मȂ सबसे 
बड़ा क्वेÌचन यह है िक क ु छ लोग देश को तोड़ने की कोिशश  कर रहे हȅ। S ome people are 
trying to fight against the Indian State. भारत देश क े िखलाफ लड़ रहे हȅ। इसिलए आज क े 
िदन िवपक्ष का वॉक आउट होना ऑन िरकॉडर् आना चािहए िक यह ऐसी देशिवरोधी गितिविधयȗ 
को Ģोत्साहन देने का एक माध्यम है और उसका एक्सĢेशन है। महोदय, कांगर्ेस पाटीर् और िवपक्ष 
क े अन्य और लोग, जो देश को खंिडत करना चा
हते हȅ, देश को कमज़ोर करना चाहते हȅ, अगर 
उनके  हाथ मजबूत करने का काम कोई कर रहा है, तो वह िवपक्ष कर रहा है।  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I have my question. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎय, सुन लीिजए ...(Ëयवध
 ान)... One minute.  I  will call you. 
माननीय सदÎय, देश मȂ जब भी कोई बड़ा बदलाव आता है, जनता बदलाव चाहती है, एक 
समÎया का समाधान चाहती है, तो इस Ģकार का घटनाकर्म देखने को िमलता है। मȅ ऐसे Ģकरण 
का साक्षी रहा हूं। मȅ जब 9TH  लोक सभा का सदÎय था, तब सामािजक न्याय का एक बहुत बड़ा 
बदलाव आया था। वह बदलाव यह आया िक मंडल कमीशन की िरपोटर् को एक तरीके  से लागू 
िकया गया था। उस समय उपदर्व हुए थे और आǛम चौक पर भी उपदर्व हुआ था। समय िकतना 
बदला!  आज उससे ज्य
ादा आंदोलन यह है िक हमȂ इसका लाभ िमलना चािहए। उस समय िवरोध 
था, लेिकन वह िवरोध आधािरत नहीं हो पाया। वक्फ़ भी उसी तरीके  का एक अध्याय बन रहा है। 
लंबे समय से इस िवषय पर सदन की नज़र होनी चािहए थी, सदन क्या िनणर्य करता है, यह 
सदन का िववेक है, पर जनता क े मन मȂ यह मुǈा हर Îतर पर बहुत Ëयापक है और इसीिलए 
कमेटी का गठन िकया गय
ा था। माननीय भूपेन्दर् यादव जी ने तािर्कक बात कही िक िजस तरीके  से 
मुझे अिधकार है, इस क ुसीर् पर बैठने वाले को अिधकार है, लोक सभा क े अध्यक्ष को अिधकार है 
िक कोई बात ऐसी कही जाए, जो िरकॉडर् पर नहीं आनी चािह
ए, वही अिधकार -  और उसी की 
ओर आपने संक े त िदया था िक वह अिधकार ज्वाइंट पािर्लयामȂटरी कमेटी क े सभापित को भी है। 
यिद इस सदन मȂ हम संयम से काम नहीं करȂगे, साथर्कता से काम नहीं करȂगे, देश क े िहत को 
सामने रखकर काम नहीं करȂगे और राजनीितक तरीके  से अपने दशर्न को पािरभािषत करȂगे, तो 
मेरे िहसाब से राÍटर् िहत खतरे मȂ पड़ेगा। मेरा सदन क े नेता से आगर्ह है िक जो लोग वैल मȂ आए हȅ, 
मȅने इस ĢवृिǄ को गंभीरत ा से िलया है, मȅने आज भी इसको नजरअंदाज़ नहीं िकया है, क्यȗिक 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
27

 
आपने कहा – दिरयािदली, लेिकन इस िवषय पर दिरयािदली िदखाने का मतलब संिवधान क े 
िनमार्ताओं का अनादर करना है। भारत की जनता का इससे बड़ा अपमान नहीं हो सकता है िक 
िजनको भेजा गया, उन्हȗने सभापित क े कहने क े बावजूद - और िवशेषकर तीन सदÎयȗ ने जो 
आचरण िक
या है, यिद उस आचरण पर आज सदन समय समािÃत से पहले कोई िनणर्य नहीं लेता 
है, तो इसके  दूरगामी पिरणाम हȗगे। यह फकर् नहीं पड़ता है िक संख्या क्या है। फकर् यह पड़ता है 
िक राÍटर् िह
त क े िखलाफ, सदन की मयार्दा क े िखलाफ संख्या क ु छ भी हो, कदम न उठाना एक 
ऐसा कमजोर Ëयिƪत्व पािरभािषत करता है, जो Ëयिƪ को खुद ही शमर् मȂ डाल देता है। इसिलए 
मȅने दिरयािदली नहीं िदखाई है।  ...(Ëयव धान )...  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सभापित जी, मेरा आगर्ह है िक इन पर एक्शन हो और ये आज क े िलए 
सदन से सÎपȂड हȗ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ यह मानकर चलता हूं िक इस िवषय क े ऊपर, during the 
course of the day, जो  कदम िविधवÞ उठाने चािहए, वे उसी तरीके  से संपािदत हो। इसकी 
शुरुआत  क ै से होती है, यह जानकारी सभी को है।  I, now, allow Dr.J ohn Brittas to ask his 
supplementary number one.    
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Thank you, Sir. I have return ed after my walkout. Let me 
register that here.  Sir, I need your protection. You told me that you will compensate. 
Please compensate in the form of ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Dr. John, you are one of the most learned Members. You are 
seeking the protection of the Chair. I am leaving, and Mr. Deputy Chairman will 
preside over the House now.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, I hope Mr. Deputy Chairman will also protect me and 
compensate. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS- Contd. 
Release of Nimisha Priya from Yemen Jail- Contd. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please put your question, Dr. John.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: You will have to protect me, Sir. I am shocked by the Minister of 
State's response, which clearly contradict s the Cabinet Minister's stance. Can a 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Minister of State override a Cabinet Minister 's statement? That's my first concern.  
Moving on to the supplementary question, I would like to address the death sentence 
handed to Nimisha Priya, a Malayali woman in Yemen. This has sparked widespread 
outrage among Keralites. An Action Committee was formed after the Government of 
Kerala reached out to the Government of India. On 27 th February, the hon. Cabinet 
Minister assured me that the Government of India prioritizes the welfare of Indians and 
will give Nimisha Priya's case their full attention. However, the Minister of State's 
response suggests that the Government of India has washed its hands off the matter, 
leaving it to the families of the deceased  and Nimisha Priya to resolve. Can the 
Government of India really be so inse nsitive to an issue that has agitated 
Keralites?...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please put your question. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, my supplementary question is this. Is it not a fact that the 
Action Committee had approached the Government of India and arranged for 
$40,000 through the MEA so that negotiators  could be roped in to ensure Nimisha 
Priya's release? If so, how can the Government of India, through the answer given by 
the Minister of State, wash its hands off the matter? 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH: Sir, I would like to say that this question has come in 
an Unstarred Question form thrice in the Lok Sabha and twice in this House. The reply 
from the Government of India has consistent ly been on these lines. The hon. Minister 
has also been persistently following up on this case, which is understandable given its 
sensitive nature. It relates to a person from  his State. I would like to point out that 
when the hon. Member said that I contradicted the Cabinet Minister, he had only read 
a part of the answer. With your permission , may I continue with the rest of the 
answer, which the hon. Member did not read, whether knowingly or unknowingly? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH : Sir, the answer given to the House by the Ministry 
clearly states in its second part that the Government accords the highest priority to 
the welfare of Indians abroad and provides all possible support to those who fall into 
distress, including in the instant case. Th e Government of India is providing all 
possible assistance in this case. And,  the hon. Member just mentioned. 
...(Interruptions)...   
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
29

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please let him reply.  
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH : Let me read, Sir. It says, “The matter regarding any 
consideration towards the release of Miss Ni misha Priya is between the family of the 
deceased and Miss Nimisha Priya's family.”  Now, as the facts of the case go, this 
lady, in question, had already been sent enced to death by the Supreme Court of 
Sana’a. She had already rece ived her sentence. Her fam ily approached us. As the 
statement goes, we provided all possible as sistance. We arranged  for the mother of 
Miss Nimisha Priya to travel to Yemen, although there was a travel ban in place.  
After that, as the hon. Member pointed out, we arranged for the transfer of 
$40,000 upon the family's written request an d facilitated the fina ncial transfers, as 
requested by the family, to Sana’a. The mo ney was transferred immediately after it 
was received in the Ministry's account and it  was made available to the families. Now 
the further process that is happening is ob viously between the vict im's family and the 
family of Ms. Nimisha Priya. Sir, I would al so like to impress on the august House and 
the hon. Members that this is a very serious and sensitive matter. It deals with the life 
and death of an Indian national. Again, I wo uld like to underline this that it would not 
be conducive to discuss the matter further as the matter is highly sensitive, and it can 
also  impact  the  outcome  of  the  case  and  the  efforts  th at  are being made by 
Ms. Nimisha Priya's family. Then, rega rding the assistance provided by the 
Government of India, I would also like to state that following the initial conviction of 
Ms. Nimisha Priya in the trial court, we arranged a lawyer through the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund. He was paid through the ICWF for taking up her case in the 
higher courts in Yemen. The appointed-lawy er contested the conviction in both the 
Appeals Court and the Supreme Court and has also been in touch with the family and 
the Power of Attorney holder  by the family. Sir, as a Government, as a responsible 
Government, which takes care of its citize ns, we have taken all possible measures, 
we have given all possible a ssistance in this matter, and  any consideration, any 
discussion, can only happen between the family of the deceased and Ms. Nimisha 
Priya's family. Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. John Brittasji, keeping the sensitivity of the 
matter, please put second supplementary briefly. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I am quite aware about the nuances in this case.  
 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I know, but put your second supplementary briefly, 
keeping that in mind.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: I am afraid, Sir, the Minister of State is either misguided or 
rather ...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please put your question.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, my question is this.  When he says that it is between these 
two families, deceased and Ms. Nimisha Priya's family, is it not a fact that as per 
Yemenis law, the deceased family and Ms. Nimisha Priya's family cannot interact 
directly? That is Yemenis law. You need to  have a negotiator there, hon. Minister. 
That is the law of Yemen. And further, Sir,  in these cases, blood money is important. 
That is the only solution to resolve this very burning issue.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, my last question is that there have been reports, reports in 
the media, that Ms. Nimisha Priya is 
£ Is the Government of India aware of it? Has the 
Government of India worked on it?  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is a very sensitive matter; very sensitive matter. 
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  I know, Sir. 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH : Sir, when the hon. Member is talking about other 
countries, I would just like to state again th at we are providing a ll possible assistance 
in this case. It is a highly sensitive matter, and we have to take into account the safety 
and security of the person in question. So further discussions, again, I would say, can 
only impact the outcome. Like I said before, this question ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. No, no; no interruptions, Dr. John Brittas.  
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH : Sir, regarding the discussion, as the hon. Member 
pointed out, as per the Yemeni laws, the family of Ms. Nimisha Priya has appointed a 
                                                            
£Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
31

 
Power of Attorney and they have been given a lawyer with our assistance and they are 
carrying out this assistance. They are carrying out the discussions.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Third supplementa ry. Shri Haris Beer an; not present. 
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Sandosh Kumar P; not present. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing 
is going on record, Dr. John Brittas, please. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Sanjeev Arora; 
not present.  Shri Ritabrata Banerjee; not present. Shri A.A. Rahim; not present. So, 
we will move to Question No. 92. ...(Interruptions)..  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, in protest, I am walking out.  
 
(At this stage, the hon. Member left the chamber.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Question No. 92. 
 
EARTHQUAKE PREPAREDNESS 
 
*92. SHRI BABUBHAI JESANGBHAI DESAI: Will the Minister of EARTH SCIENCES be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current status of earthquake prep aredness and early warning systems in 
earthquake-prone regions of the country; 
(b) whether Government can provide inform ation on recent seismic activity in 
high-risk areas and the measures taken to mitigate potential risks: and 
(c) the status of infrastructure resilience in earthquake prone regions, including 
the safety of critical facilities like hospitals, schools and bridges?  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES (DR. JITENDRA 
SINGH): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement  
 
(a) Current Status of Earthquake prep aredness and Early Warning Systems in 
Earthquake Prone regions of the Country: 
India has a well-defined National Seismologi cal Network, expanded in the length and 
breadth of the country, that monitors seismic activity 24x7 around the corner in real-
time mode and disseminates earthquake-relat ed parameters and reports  to various 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
stakeholders and the public nationwide promptly through Bhukamp App and other 
unified Dissemination System (e.g. websit e; social media / whatsapp; twitter; 
telephone, Fax).  
National Disaster Management Authorit y (NDMA) has undertaken the Earthquake 
Disaster Risk Indexing (EDRI) project to systematically address the challenges of 
rapid urbanization and ensuring earthquak e resilience in growing cities and assess 
earthquake risk across Indian cities. The results of the EDRI and risk assessment have 
far-reaching implications, particularly in ci ties experiencing rapid urbanization. By 
integrating the risk index into urban planning frameworks, cities can adopt risk-
informed decision-making, ensuring safer infrastructure development and community 
resilience. This initiative underscores NDMA’s commitment to developing for proactive 
disaster risk reduction in urban India. 
To address the community-based preparedne ss and raise awareness in earthquake- 
prone regions, NDMA runs  TV and radio campaigns  focused on earthquake 
preparedness, highlighting critical do’s an d don’ts during seismic events. Special 
programs like  ‘Aapda ka Samna’, aire d on Doordarshan, feat ure expert discussions 
on prevention and mitigation strategies , equipping the public with actionable 
knowledge to safeguard lives and property. 
Additionally, The Bureau of Indian Standa rds (BIS) has developed a seismic zoning 
map of India to update stakeholders regarding earthquake precautionary measures.  
 
Status of earthquake early warning systems: 
 
Research efforts have started in India for developing an Earthquake Early Warning 
(EEW) System for Himalayan region, but these are still at a nascent stage. The 
National Centre for Seismology (NCS), Ministry of Earth Sciences has concerted 
efforts to develop an Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) System for the Himalayan 
region under its pilot project. However, National Centre for Seismology (NCS) under 
Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) is capable of recording any earthquake of M:2.5 
and above in and around Delh i, M:3.0 and above for NE region, M:3.5 and above in 
Peninsular and extra-peninsular region, M:4.0 and above in Andaman region, and 
M:4.5 and above in border regions lying be tween 0 - 40 degree; N: 60 - 100 degree 
East. The details of the earthquakes reported  by NCS are available in public domain 
through social media and on the website of NCS (seismo.gov.in). 
 
(b)  Yes. National Centre for Seismol ogy (NCS), Ministry of Earth Sciences 
(MoES) monitors the earthquake activity in and around the country on 24x7 basis and 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
33

 
this information is disseminated after the occurrence of the earthquake to all nodal 
state and central disaster management author ities in the least possible time. For this 
purpose, NCS maintains the National Seismological Network (NSN) comprising of 166 
permanent seismological observatories spre ad across the country. The details of the 
earthquakes reported by NCS and the observa tories of NSN are available in public 
domain through social media and on the website of NCS (seismo.gov.in). 
Additionally, probabilistic seismic hazard maps by BIS and Seismic Microzonation of 
strategic cities falling in the seismic Hazard Zone III, IV, and V by NCS-MoES and with 
its technical partner institutes a step towards earthquake risk mitigation of the country. 
 
(c) The status of infrastructure resilien ce in earthquake-prone regions of India 
varies from “Poor to Moderate ”, with significant concerns regarding non-compliance 
with building codes that were constructed earlier. 
Infrastructure resilience in  earthquake-prone regions is a key aspect of risk 
management. Multiple organizations are al ready working in this regard. As also 
explained above, NDMA has undertaken th e Earthquake Disaster Risk Indexing 
(EDRI) project to address the challenges of rapid urbanization and ensure earthquake 
resilience in growing cities. Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has published criterion 
for constructing of earthquake resilient stru ctures. The design of structure should be 
such that the whole structure behaves as one unit at the time of vibration rather than 
assemblage of parts. However, it is not economical to demolish and reconstruct most 
of the poorly built structures; for such poorly built structures BIS has prepared 
guidelines for their retrofitting. Also, HUDCO & BMTPC have published guidelines 
and brochures for construction and retrofitting of buildings . Based on these 
guidelines, critical facilities like hospitals, schools and bridge s may be typically 
reinforced to withstand seismic forces, ensu ring they remain operational during an 
emergency. 
NDMA, has developed guidelines and formulates programs targeting earthquake risk 
mitigation to mitigate losses in a systematic and coordinated manner.  
These initiatives are: 
(I) Home Owner's Guide for Earthq uake & Cyclone Safety (2019):  The guide 
will make homeowners aware of va rious considerations and minimum 
requirements, which need to be take n care of while constructing and 
buying a house. 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
a. Simplified Guidelines fo r Earthquake Safety (2021):  It provides details 
based on the National Building Code of India 2016  (released by the Bureau 
of Indian Standards, Government of India) to those who are  constructing a 
house and who are  buying a flat in multi-storey buildings, which are made 
of either masonry or reinforced concrete  (RC). This Guide focuses to 
address this aspiration of potentia l homeowners, and provides the basic 
information that they should have when  constructing individual houses  or 
buying flats in multi-storey buildings. 
The National Centre for Seismology (NCS), Ministry of Earth Sciences 
(MoES)  conducts Seismic Microzonation of cities in India to generate 
integrated seismological, geological, and geotechnical parameters for 
earthquake risk resilient structures/infrastructures and buildings.  
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई: माननीय उपसभापित जी, क्या सरकार यह ÎपÍट कर सकती है िक 
भूक ं प की गितिविधयȗ क े मǈेनजर गुजरात क े िकन-िकन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, खास तौ
 र पर कच्छ मȂ, िवशेष 
रूप  से Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा कौन से तकनीकी उपाय िकए गए हȅ तथा सतकर्ता बरती जा रही है 
और क्या संभािवत खतरȗ को कम करने क े िलए कोई दीघर्कािलक उपाय लागू िकए गए हȅ? यिद 
हाँ, तो उस
का Åयोरा क्या है और उठाए गए उपायȗ से क्या लाभ हुआ है? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय चूँिक गुजरात से आते हȅ, तो बड़ी 
संवेदनशीलता क े साथ उन्हȗने यह ĢÌन रखा है, लेिकन सा
थ-ही-साथ गुजरात से इसका एक 
और भी ताÊलुक है। वैसे देखा जाए, तो क ु ल िमला कर भूक ं प की भिवÍयवाणी शत-Ģितशत करना 
बहुत किठन रहता है, लेिकन उसके  बावजूद बाकी देशȗ की तुलना मȂ भारत का Ģ यास कई गुना 
अिधक है और इसमȂ Ģगित भी हुई है। जब मȅने कहा िक इससे गुजरात का एक और भी ताÊलुक है, 
तो मेरा तात्पयर् यह था िक जब वतर्मान Ģधान मंतर्ी जी गुजरात क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तो कच्छ मȂ आए 
भूक ं प क े बाद देश मȂ पहली बार Guj
arat Disaster Ma nagement Authority की कÊपना उनके  
ǎारा लाई गई थी और यिद पहली बार भारत मȂ Disaster Management Authority का कहीं 
गठन हुआ है, तो गुजरात राज्य मȂ हुआ है। िफर उसी से Ģेिरत होकर 2005-06 मȂ तत्कालीन क ेन्दर् 
सरकार ने National Disaster Management Authority का गठन िकया। इस
ी Ģकार गुजरात क े 
उस समय क े मुख्यमंतर्ी, माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी देश मȂ पहली बार Institute of Seis mological 
Research का concept लाए और उसकी Îथापना भी पहली बार गुजरात मȂ हुई। उसके  उपरांत 
सâ 2014 अगÎत क े मास मȂ जब वे Ģधान मंतर्ी बन कर क ेन्दर् मȂ आए, तो उसी तज़र् पर क ेन्दर् मȂ भी 
National Centre for Sei
smology लाया गया।   
 जहाँ तक माननीय सदÎय का ĢÌन है, गत 10 वषș मȂ बड़ी तेज रÄतार से, बड़ी तीĨ गित 
से इसमȂ Ģगित हुई है। उदाहरण क े तौर पर हमारी जो seismic observatories हȅ, जो भूक ं प का 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
35

 
अनुमान भी लगाती हȅ; उसकी क्या मातर्ा है, वह भी तय करती हȅ और preparedness क े िलए 
चेतावनी भी देती हȅ, उनकी संख्या सâ 2014 से पहले मातर् 80 थी और गत 10 वषș मȂ 86 और जोड़ 
कर वतर्मान मȂ 166 है।  अथार्Þ 70 वषș मȂ इस देश मȂ िजतनी observatori es Îथािपत की गई थीं, 
उससे अिधक गत 10 वषș मȂ Îथािपत हुई हȅ।  कच्छ और भुज क े क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, जहाँ पर इसकी संभावना 
अिधक रहती है, उसी Ģकार उǄराखंड और िहमाचल Ģदेश क े भी क ु छ क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, उन पर िवशेष 
तवज्जो दी गई है। उदा
हरण क े तौर पर आज भी हमारा National Centre for Seismology इन 
क्षेतर्ȗ पर िवशेष नजर रखता है। यिद आप पूछȂगे िक क्या Ģगित हुई है, तो सâ 2016 मȂ भारत की 
ओर से ही Ģधान मंतर्ी, मो दी जी ने ten-point agenda रखा था।  राजधानी िदÊली मȂ एक एिशयन 
गोÍठी हुई थी, िजसमȂ लगभग 39 दे शȗ ने भाग िलया था। उसके  बाद Coalition for Disaster 
Resilient Infrastructure का गठन िकया गया। सâ 2047 को लेकर भारत सरकार जो Vision 
Document तैयार कर रही है, या जो vision रखा  गया है, Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी की Ģेरणा से, 
उसमȂ भूक ं प की दृि
Íट से Earthquake Risk Res ilient India by 2047, यह लÑय िनधार्िरत िकया 
गया है। 2021 से लेकर 2025 तक एक नए Ģयोग का भी इÎतेमाल िकया गया - mock exercises.  
उसमȂ िवशेषकर भुज और कच्छ क े क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ ये exercises आरंिभक दौर मȂ सâ 2021 मȂ िकए गए।  
इसके  अितिरƪ, क ु छ कच्छ और भुज क े अनुभव क े बाद देश भर मȂ एक concept लाया गया िक 
retro
fitting, िक जो इमारतȂ कमजोर हȅ या जो भूक ं प वाले क्षेतर् मȂ, earthquake prone क्षेतर् मȂ हȅ, 
उनका िकस तरह से पुनिर्नमार्ण िकया जा सके । उसके  िलए Insurance po
ol भी बनाया गया और 
िवशेष कर गुजरात और अन्य क्षेतर्ȗ को इसमȂ ध्यान मȂ रखा गया। यह Ģयास िनरंतर जारी है।   
इसका उǄर बहुत लंबा हो जाएगा, इसिलए मȅ संक्षेप मȂ इसके  बारे मȂ इतना ही कहता हूं। 
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसं
गभाई देसाई: महोदय, क्या सरकार यह बता सकती है िक भूक ं प Ģभािवत क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
अÎपतालȗ, Îकू लȗ और पुलȗ जैसी महत्वपूणर् सुिवधाओं की सुरक्षा सुिनिÌचत कर ने क े िलए, 
संरचनात्मक मजबूती क े िलए, कौन-कौन से तकनीकी उपाय अपनाए जा रहे हȅ? 
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: सर, भारत का लगभग 59 Ģितशत क्षेतर्, that means 60 per cent is 
earthquake prone. इसिलए िवगत क ु छ वषș मȂ Building  Code compliance क े दÎतावेज 
तैयार िकए गए िक इन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ अगर िनमार्ण कायर् होना है, इमारतȗ का क ंÎटर्क्शन वकर् होना है, 
तो उसके  िलए क्या मापदंड रहȂगे, उसके  िलए क्या precautions भी रहȂगे और िकस तरह की 
ËयवÎथाएं रहȂगी। इसी Ģकार, जो पुरानी इ मारते हȅ, उनके  िनमार्ण क े िलए िकस Ģकार की 
ËयवÎथा की जाए, तािक भूक ं प क े बावजूद भी उनसे जान और माल का नुकसान नहीं हो पाए और 
उन Îटर्क्चसर् को हम िजतना अिधक सुरिक्षत रख पाएँ, रख सकȂ । जैसा माननीय सदÎय जी ने 
अÎपतालȗ मȂ Critical care concern
s को लेकर कहा, तो उसमȂ मुझे सदन क े साथ यह बात 
साझा करते हुए बड़ा संतोष भी होता होता है िक एÇस, नई िदÊली और भुज क्षेतर् क े अÎपताल, देश 
क े पहले ऐसे अÎपताल हȅ, िजनको cri
tical care parameters क े आधार पर पुन: restructuring 
की उस योजना मȂ, उस Ãलान मȂ लाया गया है।  इसी तरह आने वाले समय मȂ खासतौर से िसफर् 
अÎपताल ही नहीं, बिÊक बच्चȗ क े िलए जो Îकू ल की इमारतȂ हȅ या इस Ģक ार  क े जो sensitive 
structures हȅ, उनका भी पुनिर्नमाण करने क े िलए या जो नयी इमारतȂ बन रही हȅ, उनके  िलए नए 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
मापदंड Îथािपत करने क े िलए समय-समय पर कायर् भी हो रहा है। उन्हȂ एक Ģकार की आिर्थक 
सहायता भी दी जा रही है, क्यȗिक कहीं-कहीं यह भी ध्यान मȂ आया िक बहुत सारे लोग, िजनकी 
इमारतȂ पुरानी हो चुकी थीं, आिर्थक कारणȗ से उनक ी पुन: structuring करने मȂ संकोच करते थे, 
तो सरकार ने उस बात को भी बड़ी संवेदनशीलता से िलया है। 
 
Ǜी रतनजीत Ģताप नारायन िंसह: महोदय, मȅ पूवीर् उǄर Ģदेश मȂ आता हूं।  नेपाल क े अंतगर्त 
तमाम भूक ं प आए हȅ और हर 3 महीने, 6
 महीने मȂ पूवार्ंचल और िबहार की तरफ झटके , िजन्हȂ 
tremors कहते हȅ, हम फील करते हȅ।  
आपने अपने जवाब मȂ साफ तौर से िलखा है िक आप लोगȗ ने Himalayan range मȂ एक 
pilot project शुरू  िकया है, िजसके  अंतगर्त earl
y warning signs की वजह से, हम लोगȗ को 
पहले क ु छ early warning signs िमल पाएंगे। तो मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी से जानना चाहूंगा िक यह जो 
pilot project आपने Himalayan corridor मȂ चालू कर रखा है, क्या हमारा क्षेतर् भी इससे Ģभािवत 
होगा और इसकी िरपोट्
सर् कब तक आ जाएंगी? यह मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहूंगा।  
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: उपसभापित महोदय,  माननीय सदÎय ने बड़ा महत्वपूणर् ĢÌन रखा है।  यह भी 
गतेक वषș मȂ इसी सरकार ǎारा सÇभव हो पाया िक यह जो क्षेतर् है, जैसा माननीय सदÎय जी  ने 
Himalayan belt क े बारे मȂ कहा है, तो उसमȂ उǄराखंड भी आत
ा है, उǄर Ģदेश क े क ु छ भाग, जो 
इन्हȗने कहा, वे भी हȅ और साथ ही इसमȂ िहमाचल भी है, उनक ो लेकर  early warning system 
की एक ËयवÎथा िनिर्मत की गई है। इसके  साथ ही साथ disaster response  training की भी एक 
ËयवÎथा अलग से की गई है। यह वहां पर जो भी संबंिधत लोग हȅ, उनके  िलए और आम समाज 
तथा आम नागिरकȗ क े िलए भी है। इस के  िलए जागरूकता  क े बहुत सारे कायर्कर्म भी Ģारंभ िकये 
गये, क्यȗिक जैसा मȅने कहा िक भूक ं प की शत-Ģितशत भिवÍयवाणी पहले से करना या advance 
forecast is not  always possible, whichever is the country or part of the world. इसीिलए 
अनेक अलग-अलग िकÎम क े कायर्कर्म Ģारंभ िकए, उदाहरण क े तौर पर दूरदशर्न पर 'आपदा का 
सामना' नाम का एक कायर्कर्म Ģारंभ िकया  गय
ा, mock exercises की गईं और 2019 मȂ इसी 
सरकार ने Home Owners’ Guide for Earthquake and Cyclone Safety  लाया, तािक जब भी 
वहाँ कोई नया construction करने क े िलए Ãलान िकया जाए, तो  that could be a handy book 
for you to follow certain guidelines and precautions. इसी Ģकार 2021 मȂ Simplified 
Guidelines for Earthquake Safety  शीषर्क से एक अलग पुिÎ
तका भी रिचत की गई, which 
provides details about the statisti cal and building infrastructure. 2016 मȂ National 
Building Code of India क े तहत और इसी तरह से िहमालयन रȂज क े िलए, जैसे इन्हȗने कहा िक 
Early Warning System िवशेष कर उन क्षेतर्ȗ पर क ेिन्दर्त करके  या उन क्षेतर्ȗ पर फोकस करके  
Ģारंभ िकया गया है - यह एक नई शुरुआत  है और जैसे-जैसे हम आगे बढ़Ȃगे, इसके  अनुभव से 
इसमȂ और अि
धक िवकास भी िकया जाएगा तथा value addition करने का भी Ģयास रहेगा। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal - not present. Shrimati S. 
Phangnon Konyak. 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
37

 
SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK:  Sir, I am  grateful to the Ministry for developing 
an Earthquake Early Warning System for th e Himalayan region. Through you, Sir, I 
would like to ask the hon. Minister if it covers the North-East Region, which is a 
seismic-5 zone and also when the pilot project, being developed, will be completed. 
 
D R .  J I T E N D R A  S I N G H :  S i r ,  I  a m  g l a d  t h at the hon. Member has raised a question 
about the North-East which is very high on th e priority of the Prime Minister Modi as 
well as this Government. As far as the issu e of earthquake is concerned, regarding 
the Early Warning System, of course, as I was mentioning in response to the earlier 
question, in addition to the other earthquake prone regions, it also has a special focus 
for the North-East. In fact, we have inst alled observatories which are capable of 
recording the earthquake tremors of 3.0 and above on the Richter Scale because less 
than that, sometimes, may not be very sign ificant. So, that is  an arrangement, 
wheareas in some other regions, it may be even more, 4.0 and above, but in the case 
of the North-East, it is 3.0 and above.  Sim ilarly, in the last few years, there has been 
such a high priority given, both to the No rth-East as well as to the issue of these 
natural calamities happening that you would appreciate that even in the first 100 days 
of the third term of Prime Minister Modi , which is popularly described as ‘Modi 
Government 3.0’, most of the important decisions taken by the Government pertained 
either to the North-East or to the techno logical advancements related to all these 
issues.  For example, related to this Mini stry itself, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, 
which deals with the earthquakes, Mission Mausam, for the first time, was launched 
by any Government in India during the firs t 100 days of Modi Government 3.0. And, 
correspondingly, in the first 100 days itself, you had a decision to develop semi-
conductors and to earmark Rs.1,000 crore for the space start-ups. So, that creates 
an ecosystem which primarily focuses on t echnological advancements to deal with 
these issues. Prime Minister Modi himself has paid as many as almost 70 visits to the 
North-East in the last ten year s, I think, which is more than the total number of visits 
by all the preceding Prime Ministers, in spite of the fact that the immediate past Prime 
Minister happened to be a Me mber from the North-East, though in the Rajya Sabha.  
So, you can understand the kind of signifi cance given to the North-East. At the same 
time, the Ministers in the Government were  assigned to pay regular visits to the 
North-East. So, every 15 days, there are, at  least, two Union Ministers visiting North-
East, which is complete depa rture from what it was in the earlier times when a 
Minister from the Centre visited the North- East; the newspapers would report that a 
Minister from Union had gone there. So, it has created not only the filling up of the 
physical gap but also done away with the mental barriers. There was a time when the 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
youth from the North-East, and I am sure the hon. Member has been a witness to 
that because she has been a prominent person there, were hesitant to even come to 
capital city of Delhi. There were so ma ny cases registered against inappropriate 
behaviours.  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please be brief. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : Today, the children from the No rth East are seen in all the 
sectors, be it tourism industry, aviation indu stry. You take a flight to any part of the 
country, you will see their presence. It has cr eated a lot of mainstreaming in the last 
ten years. 
 
Ǜी मयंक भाई जयदेव भाई नायक: सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहता हूँ िक भूक ं प से 
बचने क े िलए आधुिनक मशीनरी और तकनीकी क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने उपलÅध करवाई है, मगर गुजरात 
मȂ कभी-कभी तीन और चार की तीĨता वाले भूक ं प आ रहे हȅ।  ऐसे मȂ, कई जगह पर िनरंतर छोटे-
छोटे भूक ं प आने से कई मकान Ģभािवत होते हȅ।  अगर उन मक
ानȗ क े इंÌयोरȂस िलए गए हȅ, तो 
इंÌयोरȂस क ंपनी वाले, भूक ं प क े कारण इस मकान को नुकसान हुआ है, ऐस
ा मानने को तैयार नहीं 
होते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप सिÃलमȂटरी छोटा पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी मयंक भाई जयदेव भाई नायक: क्या मंतर्ालय क े पास ऐसी कोई ËयवÎथा है िक इस समय मȂ 
इतनी तीĨता का भूक ं प आया था, ऐसा कोई सिर्टिफके ट पीिड़त Ëयिƪ को िमल सके  और िफर वह 
उसे इंÌयोरȂस क ंपनी को सबिमट कर सके , ता
िक उसने जो  इंÌयोरȂस का Ģ ीिमयम  भरा है, उसका 
भुगतान उसे िमल सके ?  
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: सर, माननीय सदÎय ने जो अपना िंबदु रखा है, उस पर मȅ पहले भी बात कर 
चुका हूँ, लेिकन इसमȂ यह भी जोड़ िदया जाए िक इंÌयोरȂस का Ģावधान भी इसी सरकार ने लाया 
और अगर उसकी precise बात की जा
ए, तो उसका नाम Risk Transfer Mechanism रखा गया 
है।  इस Risk Transfer Mechanism क े तहत यिद भूक ं प क े पिरणामÎवरुप िकसी इमारत मȂ कोई 
दरार पड़ जाती है, कर्ै क्स आते हȅ या नुकसान होता है, तो उसकी असेसमȂट करने का एक 
मेक ैिनज्म है िक वह नुकसान िकस मातर्ा मȂ या िकस हद तक हुआ है। िफ
र, उसके  अनुसार यह 
अपेक्षा की जाती है िक इंÌयोरȂस क ंपिनयȗ की ओर से उसका मुआवजा या क ंपनसेशन िमलेगा ।  
यिद कोई ऐसा specific case है,  जहा ं इंÌयोरȂस क ंपनी या इंÌयोरȂस अिधकािरयȗ ने उनके  साथ 
सहयोग नहीं िकया है, तो उसकी जांच अलग से की जा सकती है। मगर, क ु ल िमलाकर  i n  
general, we have a very vibrant system in place and this is also an imaginative step 
taken by this Government.  उसके  तहत, जो पुरानी िबिंÊडग्स हȅ और अगर उनमȂ कर्ै क आता 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
39

 
है, तो उनको पुनिर्निर्मत करने की भी ËयवÎथा रहती है और जो नई िबिंÊडग्स हȅ, उनमȂ यह अपेक्षा 
की जाती है िक उनको नए मापदंड क े अनुसार बनाया जाए। Coupled with this, the whole 
ecosystem is there. There is a guid e book named ‘Home Owners’ Guide,’ िजसको 
हमने जारी िकया है। इसके  अलावा, हमने simplified guidelines भी जारी की हȅ। अब यह अपेक्षा 
की जाती है िक क ंÎटर्क्शन करने वाली जो authorities, agencies, co
ntractors या private 
Ëयिƪ हȅ,  वे उन गाइडलाइंस का पालन करȂ, तािक उस तरह की नौबत ही न आए।     
                                                                           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Question No. 93. 
 
National Pension Scheme for traders and self-employed persons 
 
# 93. DR.  KALPANA SAINI: Will the Minister of LABOUR AND  EMPLOYMENT be 
pleased to state: 
(a)  The total number of traders and self-e mployed individuals registered under 
National Pension Scheme so far; 
(b)  the manner in which the pension is provided to the family of the beneficiary under 
the said scheme in case of death of the beneficiary; 
(c)  whether any special provision has been made by Government for women traders 
and self-employed women; and 
(d)  if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT (DR. MANSUKH MANDAVIYA): 
(a) to (d) A Statment is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) The National Pension Scheme for Traders and Self-Employed Persons was 
launched in September, 2019. This is a voluntary and contributory pension scheme for 
providing a monthly assured pension of Rs. 3000/- after attaining the age of 60 years 
to the retail traders/ shopkeepers and se lf-employed persons. The retail traders, 
shopkeepers and self-employed persons in the age group of 18-40 years with an 
annual turnover not exceeding Rs. 1.5 crore and not members of EPFO/ESIC/NPS 
(Govt. funded)/PM-SYM or not an income-tax payer, are eligible to join the scheme. 
                                                            
# Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
The monthly contribution amount by beneficiary ranges from Rs. 55/- to Rs. 200/- 
depending upon the entry age of the benefi ciary and equal matching contribution is 
paid by the Central Government. Enrolmen t to the scheme is done through the 
Common Service Centres, with its networ k of about 4 lakh Centres across the 
country. In addition, eligible people can also self-enroll through visiting the portal 
www.maandhan.in. Eligible women traders and self-employed women can also enroll 
and get benefits of the scheme. 
The number of beneficiaries enrolled und er this scheme as on 10.02.2025 are 
59,144.  
The subscriber of the scheme receives an assured pension of Rs. 3000/- per 
month after attaining the age of 60 years, and if the subscriber dies, the spouse of the 
beneficiary is entitled to receive 50% of the pension as family pension. If a beneficiary 
has given regular contribution and died du e to any cause before 60 years, his/her 
spouse will be entitled to continue the scheme subsequently by  payment of regular 
contribution.  
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी: माननीय उपसभापित जी,  मेरा ĢÌन है िक क्या सरकार इस योजना की 
जागरूकता  बढ़ाने और िडिजटल Ģिकर्या को सरल बनाने क े िलए कोई िवशेष अिभयान चला रही 
है? िवशेष रूप  से, मिहला Ëयापािरयȗ और Îव
 रोजगार करने वाली मिहलाओं क े िलए क्या कोई 
िवशेष Ģोत्साहन योजना है? 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: उपसभापित जी, मोदी सरकार ने देश क े मध्यम वगर् और गरीब लोगȗ को 
िपछली लाइफ मȂ िसक्योिरटी िमले, खासकर, उनको पȂशन िसक्योिरटी िम
 ले, एक्सीडȂट इंÌयोरȂस 
िमले, हेÊथ िसक्योिरटी िमले और फ ू ड िसक्योिरटी िमले, इसके  िलए अथक Ģयास िकया है।   इस 
Ģयास का पिरणाम यह है िक आज देश मȂ 920 िमिलयन, यानी 92 करोड़ लोग, यानी देश की क ु ल 
पॉपुलेशन की 65% पॉपुलेशन को इनमȂ से एक या एक से अिधक िसक्योिरटी िमली है।  
सामान्यतः वषर् 1999 से तीन Ģकार की योजनाएं चा
लू की गई थीं। उनमȂ से "Ģधानमंतर्ी Ǜम योगी 
मानधन योजना" और छोटे Ëयापािरयȗ क े िलए Ģधानमंतर्ी सहाय योजना का लाभ देश क े छो ट े 
Ëयापािरयȗ एवं छोटे तबके  क े लोगȗ को िमलता है। 
देश मȂ आज तक क ु ल िमलाकर 7 लाख लोगȗ ने इस योजना मȂ िहÎसा िलया है। महोदय, 
इस योजना मȂ Ģावधान है िक 18 से 40 वषर् की आयु तक कोई Ëयिƪ िज तना contribution करता 
है, उतना ही contribution सरकार की ओर से िकया जाता है और उस Ëयिƪ को 60 वषर् की उĦ 
क े बाद 3,000 रुपय े की assured pension दी जाती है। आज छोटे लोगȗ क े िलए, छोटा काम 
करने वाले लोगȗ क े िलए बहुत उपयोगी होती है। यह योजना पूरे देश मȂ लागू है और उसका अच्छी 
तरह से implementation करने क े िलए हम Îटेट गवनर्मȂट क े साथ discussion करत े हȅ। सभी 
Îटेट्स मȂ और गर्ामीण Îतर पर Natio
nal Career Service Portal का  भी उपयोग करते हȅ, तािक 
उसका लाभ लोगȗ को िमले। कोई भी Ëयिƪ या कोई organi zation अपने यहां काम करने वालो 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
41

 
लोगȗ  को या Ëयापािरयȗ को website पर जाकर अपना contribution दे सकते हȅ, तािक जनता 
ज्यादा से ज्यादा लाभ उससे ले सके ।  
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी: क्या सरकार इस योजना की पहुंच बढ़ाने क े िलए हैÊपलाइन, िशिवर, Ģिशक्षण 
कायर्कर्म या अन्य कोई िवशेष पहल करने पर िव चार कर रही है, यिद हां, तो तत्संबंधी िववरण 
क्या है? 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जो ĢÌन पूछा है, उसमȂ योजना का 
expansion, इस योजना से लोगȗ को ज्यादा से ज्यादा लाभ िमल सके  और इसकी पहुंच बढ़े, 
इसके  िलए कई तरह क े Ģिशक्षण कायर्कर्म भी चलाए, जाते हȅ, digitally awareness का कायर्कर्म 
भी चलाते हȅ और अलग-अलग तरह क े िवज्ञापन से भी इस योजना का Ģचार-Ģसार करते हȅ, 
तािक लोग इस योजना क े साथ जुड़ कर उसका अिध क से अिधक लाभ ले सकȂ । 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Third Supplementary.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman; not present. 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal; not present. Shrima ti Sulata Deo; not present.  Dr. V. 
Sivadasan; not present.  So, the third Supplementary goes to Shrimati Mamata 
Mohanta.   
 
Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
जानना चाहती हूं िक जैसे िक हम सभी जानते हȅ िक वतर्मान सरकार ने हर वगर् क े िव
कास  क े िलए 
तरह-तरह की योजनाएं बनाई हȅ। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी हर वगर् और हर समाज क े लोगȗ क े 
िवकास क े िलए िंचितत रहते हȅ। क्या ‘राÍटर्ीय पȂशन Îकीम’ मȂ बुज़ुगर् और िदËयांग Ëयिƪयȗ क े िलए 
कोई ËयवÎथ
ा की गई है और ओिडशा राज्य मȂ इस ‘राÍटर्ीय पȂशन Îकीम’ को  बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 
क्या कदम उठाए गए हȅ? 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया:  महोदय, माननीय सदÎया ने पȂशन Îकीम क े िवÎतार और ओिडशा मȂ भी 
उसका लाभ िमल सके , इस बारे मȂ ĢÌन िकया है, तो मȅ बताना चाहत ा हूं िक पȂशन Îकीम और 
अलग-अलग तरह की ÎकीÇस, जो लोगȗ को सोशल िसक्योिरटी देती हȅ, उनके  िलए गवनर्मȂट ने 
पहली बार 80 करोड़  लोगȗ को मुÄत अनाज देकर food security Ģदान की है। माननीय 
उपसभापित जी, बीमारी कभी िकसी को पूछ कर नहीं आती है। वह गरीब क े यहां भी आती है और 
अमीर क े यहां भी आती है। जब िकसी अमीर क े यहां कोई बीमारी आती है, तो उस अमी
र Ëयिƪ 
की जेब मȂ पैसा होता है, वह अपना इलाज करवा लेता है, लेिकन जब िक
सी गरीब Ëयिƪ क े यहां 
बीमारी आती है, तब उसको बहुत िदक्कत होती है, उसके  पास इलाज पैसे नहीं होते हȅ, िजसको 
ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए मोदी जी ने कहा था िक देश मȂ िकसी भी गरीब पिरवार मȂ दवाई क े अभाव मȂ 
और िबना टर्ीटमȂट क े िकसी की मृत्यु हो जाने की नौबत नहीं आनी चािहए
। उनके  िलए ‘आयुÍमान 
भारत’ योजना लाई गई, जो health security है। आज देश मȂ 60 करोड़ लोगȗ को 5 लाख रुपय े 
तक क े मुÄत इलाज की गारंटी दी गई है। िपछले  ही बजट मȂ announc
e हुआ िक 70 वष र् क े 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
अिधक उĦ वाले सभी बुज़ुगर् लोगȗ को भी ‘आयुÍमान भारत’ योजना क े अंतगर्त लाया गया और इस 
वतर्मान बजट मȂ भी announcement िकया गया िक जो Gig workers है, जो aggregators क े 
under काम करते हȅ, उन लोगȗ को भी ‘आयुÍमान भारत’ योजना मȂ लाया जाएगा। क ु ल िमलाकर 
65 करोड़ लोगȗ को िलए एक तरह की health security िमल जाएगी। इसके  अलावा बुज़ुगर् और 
disable लोगȗ को social security और पȂशन देने क े िलए भी ËयवÎथा है। ऐसे लो
गȗ क े िलए 
National Widow Pension Scheme और National Old Age Pension Scheme चल  रही हȅ। 
आज मुझे यहां बताते हुए खुशी हो रही है िक क ेवल एक दशक पहले सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट लोगȗ को 
सोशल िसक्योिरटी दी गई थी, जो pensionable हȗ। 
आज मोदी गवनर्मȂट ने 48 परसȂट लोगȗ को, िजसको कोई न कोई क ै श क े रूप  मȂ सोशल 
िसक्योिरटी िमलती है, उसका Ģावधान िकया है।  उसमȂ हम Îटेट को इन्क्लूड नहीं करते हȅ।  कई 
Îटेट गवनर्मȂट क े ǎारा भी कई तरह की सोशल िसक्योिरटी दी गई है।   उसमȂ फ ू ड िसक्योिरटी 
include नहीं है।  यिद फ ू ड िसक्योिरटी  include हो जाती, तो देश मȂ 48 मȂ से 65 परसȂट लोगȗ को 
सोशल िसक्योिरटी Ģदान करने वाला कोई  देश है, तो उस देश का नाम भारत है, जो इतने बड़े 
देश मȂ 92 िमिलयन, 92  करोड़ लोगȗ को सोशल िसक्योिरटी Ģदान कर रहा है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: अगला सÃलीमȂटरी, डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  उपसभापित  महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी महोदय से पूछना 
चाहता हूं िक यह Îकीम Ëयापािरयȗ क े िलए, self employed लोगȗ क े िलए बहुत अच्छी है, 
िजनको 18 से 40 तक उनको पैसे भरने पड़ते हȅ और 60 क े बाद पȂशन िमलती है, लेिकन  कभी-
कभी ऐसी घटनाएं होती हȅ िक यिद उसकी मृत्यु 60 से पहले हुई, तो जो  भरे हुए पैसे हȅ, क्य
ा 
उनके  पैसे िरटनर् होते हȅ?  दूसरी बात यह है िक क्या Îपाउस  और जो माइनर िचÊडर्न हȅ, उनक ो 
पȂशन का लाभ एडÊट होने तक िमलता है? 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: उपसभापित  जी, माननीय सदÎय ने बहुत अच्छा ĢÌन पूछा  है। एनपीएस 
टर्ेǵसर्, जो छो
 टे-मोटे कारोबारी हȅ और ये पȂशन मȂ इन्क्लूड हȅ, उनका  Îपेिसिफक क्वेÌचन यह है 
िक यिद उसकी मृत्यु 60 से पहले हो गई, तो उसका क्या होगा?  यिद उसकी 60 साल से पहले 
मृत्यु हो जाती है, तो  िवद इन्टर्Îट उसको पैसा िमल सकता है।   उसके  spouse को 50 परसȂट 
पȂशन िमल सकती है और शायद कई बार दस साल क े बाद उससे िवदडर्ॉ हो जाना चा
हते हȅ, तो 
िवदडर्ॉ होने की सुिवधा उसमȂ िमलती है। उसमȂ बȅक क े साथ इंटरेÎट क े साथ िवदडर्ॉ हो सकते हȅ।  
एकदम flexible scheme है। इस Îकी
म का ज्यादा से ज्यादा लोग लाभ लȂ, इस  िदशा मȂ हम 
Ģयास कर रहे हȅ, तािक िपछली लाइफ मȂ उसको सोशल िसक्योिरटी िमले। यिद 60 साल क े बाद 
वे िरटायर हो गए हȗ, छोटे लोग हȗ, तो तीन हजार रुपय े उसके  जीवन का आधार बन सके , इस 
उǈेÌय क े साथ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी इस योजना को लेकर आए थे और आज 60 लाख से अिधक लोग 
उसका लाभ ले चुक े हȅ। इस योजना का लाभ और ज्यादा लोग ले सकȂ, उसके  िलए हम Ģयास 
करȂगे।   
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
43

 
Ǜी उपसभापित: लाÎट सÃलीमȂटरी, डा. िसकं दर क ुमार। 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR:  Sir, with your permission, I would like to know this from the 
hon. Minister.  How can an individual re gister himself in the National Pension 
Scheme?  And how many individuals have registered under the National Pension 
Scheme in our country? 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: उपसभापित जी, नेशनल पȂशन Îकीम कई टाइÃस की हȅ। हर टाइप की 
Îकीम मȂ अलग-अलग लाभाथीर् हȅ। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने Ǜिमक लोग, छोटे मजदूर लोग, जो अभी 
Îपेिसिफक एनपीएस क ेडर का ĢÌन था, उसका िवव
रण िकया। वैसे ही Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜम योगी 
मानधन योजना है। ये छोटे और गरीब तबके  क े लोग, जो कहीं न कहीं इनफ़ॉमर्ल  सेक्टर मȂ काम 
करते हȅ, ऐसे लोगȗ को सोशल िसक्योिरटी िमले, उनके  िलए भी Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜम योगी मानधन 
योजना चल रही है।  इस योजना मȂ आज तक 45 लाख से अिधक लोग ऑलरेडी जुड़ चुक े हȅ और 
उसमȂ भी उसको 60 साल क े बाद ती
न हजार रुपय े पȂशन िमलती है। उसमȂ एक अच्छी ËयवÎथ ा है 
िक यिद वे िकसी क े घर पर काम करते हȅ, तो उनके  िबहाफ पर वे भी उसमȂ पȂशन जमा करा दȂ ।  
िकसी aggregators क े यहां काम करते हȅ, तो वे भी वहां पर पैसा जमा करा सकते हȅ। यिद कोई 
क ंपनी है और वहां कोई सफाई करने वाला है या कोई और काम करता है, उसके  िबहाफ पर 
क ंपनी भी उसका क ंटर्ीÅयूशन दे दे या Îवयं  क ंटर्ीÅयूशन दे दे, तो िजतना पैसा लाभाथीर् जमा करते 
हȅ, इतना ही पैसा मोदी गवनर्मȂट की ओर से िदया जाता है, तो उससे भी ऐसे लोगȗ को  60 सा
ल 
क े बाद सोशल िसक्योिरटी िमलती है, उसको भी तीन हजार रुपय े पȂशन िमलती है, वैसे ही 
ईपीएफओ मȂ जो enrolm ent  होती है, उसके  भी लाभाथीर् हȅ, उनको ऑलरेडी पȂशन िमल रही है।  
महोदय, ऐसे  लोगȗ की संख्या 78 हज़ार से 80 लाख क े आगे, पीछे है।   
महोदय, जैसे यह योजना है, वैसे ही अटल पȂशन योजना है। यह योजना भी सभी क े िलए 
ओपन है।  महोदय, अटल पȂशन योजना मȂ भी आज तक 5.95 करोड़ लोग अटल पȂशन योजना से 
जुड़े हुए हȅ। उपसभापित जी, अटल पȂशन योजना मȂ 3 हज़ार रुपय े से लेकर 5 हज़ार रुपय े तक 
की पȂशन की िसक्युिरटी देते हȅ। इस योजना मȂ उसे अलग-अलग एज़ मȂ, अलग-अलग क ंटर्ीÅयूशन 
देना होता है। महोदय, िजतना इसमȂ िजतना क ंटर्ी
Åयूशन लाभाथीर् देगा, उतने ही क ंटर्ीÅयूशन की 
भारत सरकार की ओर से मदद दी जाती है। महोदय, क ु ल िमलाकर इन सभी योजन ाओं मȂ - यिद 
गवनर्मȂट एÇÃलॉइज़ को छोड़ दȂ, तो मोटे तौर पर 5 करोड़ से अिधक लोग, िजनको साठ साल क े 
बाद पȂशन िमले, इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा आज क े िदन उपलÅध हो चुकी है और भिवÍय मȂ उसे 
क ंिĢहȂिसव रूप  मȂ, एक एÇĤेला क े नीचे सारी Îक
ीÇस का टोटल लाभ िमले, और लोग भी उससे 
जुड़Ȃ, अपनी िपछली लाइफ को सेक्योर करȂ – सरकार इस िदशा मȂ काम कर रही है।       
                                                                                   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Question No. 94; Shri Digvijaya Singh; not present.  Now, 
supplementaries.
 
 
  
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
* Q. No. 94. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Encroachment on the birthplace of music maestro Tansen  
*94.  SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Will the Minister of CULTURE be pleased to state:. 
(a)  the persons responsible for encroach ing upon the birthpl ace of music maestro 
Ramtanu Pandey also popularly known as Tansen, in the village of Behat located 
in the Gwalior district of Madhya Pradesh; 
(b)  whether Government is making efforts to remove the said encroachment ; and 
(c)  whether Government has any plans fo r the upgradation and development of the 
Dhrupad Centre located in Behat, if so , the details thereof and by when this 
Centre is expected to be developed? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE (RAO INDERJIT SINGH): 
(a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Birthplace of Music Maestro, Ta nsen in village of Behat District Gwalior, 
Madhya Pradesh is not protected monument under the jurisdiction of Archaeological 
Survey of India (ASI). However, as pe r information from State Archaeology & 
Museums, Government of Madhya Pradesh,  there are already houses built around 
Tansen's house. 
(c) At present there is no proposal with ASI or State Archaeology & Museums, 
Government of Madhya Pradesh for the upgradation and development of Dhrupad 
Centre located in village Behat. 
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवरा: उपसभापित महोदय,  मुझे ĢÌन पूछने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। महोदय, क ु छ ही िदन पहले चीन क े बीिंजग मȂ रामायण का मंचन हुआ। 
महोदय बीिंजग मȂ एक बहुत ही ĢेिÎ टिजयस  िथएटर है और उस िथयेटर का नाम है - शुन्यी गर्ȅड 
िथएटर। महोदय, उस िथएटर मȂ उन्हȗने मȂडिरन भाषा मȂ रामायण का पहला बड़ा मंचन आयोिजत 
िकया। महोदय, मȅ मानता हूं िक यह भारतीय संÎकृ ित क े िलए एक बहुत ही बड़ी सांÎकृ ित क और 
िडÃलोमेिटक जीत है। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा और ĢÌन पूछना चाहूंगा िक, 
does the Ministry have any plans to take Ramayan, Mahabharat and our classic arts, 
music, literature to the Far East, East Asia and South-East Asia where there is a huge 
influence of our culture on these regions?  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
45

 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद, हालांिक ĢÌन है - Encroachment on 
the Birthplace of Music Maestro Tansen. माननीय मंतर्ी जी चाहȂ, तो इस ĢÌन का जवाब दे 
सकते हȅ।  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: आदरणीय उपसभापित जी, जैसा िक आपने फ़रमाया है िक िवषय music 
maestro का है और one of the greatest music maestro Tansen क े िवषय पर है, लेिकन 
माननीय सदÎय ǎारा जो सवाल सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन क े तौर पर  पूछा गया है, उसके  अंदर तंत है 
और मȅ समझता हूं िक हरेक मुÊक का यह Ģयास रहता है िक उसकी छिव, उसके  एि पक्स और 
मुÊकȗ तक पहुँचाएँ जाएँ। ये िकस ज़िरये से पहुँचाएँ जाएं, उस पर िवचार िकया जा सकता है, 
लेिकन मȅ समझता हूं िक इसको पहुँचाने की आवÌयकता पर आज की सरकार क े अंदर, 
नरेन्दर्भाई मोदी की सरकार क े अंदर Ģाथिमकता दी जाती है। माननीय सांसद महोदय का सुझाव 
अच्छा है, हम इसको जरूर  क ंिसडर करȂगे।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े 
जी, मȅने आपको िवषय बता िदया है िक िकस पर सवाल पूछना है।  
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े: मेरा सवाल इसी से संबंिधत है। क्यȗिक िंहदुÎतान की संÎकृ ित पर 
आकर्मण हो रहा है, इसि
लए मȅ उसी क े बारे मȂ पूछ रहा हूं।  
  
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप उसी से संबंिधत सवाल पूिछए। 
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से  बताना चाहत
 ा हूं 
िक हमारे िंहदुÎतान की संÎकृ ित पर एक आकर्मण हो रहा है। महोदय, ĤॉडकाÎट और सोशल 
मीिडया क े माध्यम से ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: सवाल क ु छ और है।  
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े: नहीं, वही है। ...(Ëयव धान )...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no; I will not allow.  सवाल  है - Encroachment on the 
Birthplace of Music Maestro Tansen.  
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े:
*  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: वह िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगा। आप बैठ जाइए। वह िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रहा है। 
…(Ëयवधान)... 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े : * 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  आप बैठ जाइए।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Question No. 95. Shri Ra jeev Shukla- not present.  
Supplementaries, please.  
 
* Q. No. 95. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Chinese influence on India’s friendly countries 
 
*95. SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA: Will the Minister of EXTERNAL AFFAIRS be pleased to 
state:  
(a)  whether the Ministry is aware of the growing  Chinese   influence   on   India’s  
friendly countries,  including our neighbouring countries;  
(b)  if so, the details thereof; (c) the steps taken by the Ministry, if any, to strengthen 
confidence of the friendly countries on India and  to expand co-operation on 
bilateral and multilateral fronts; and  
(d) the  details in this regard?  
 
THE  MINISTER  OF  ST
ATE  I N    T H E    M I N I S T R Y    O F    E X T E R N A L    A F F A I R S    
(SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the table of the 
House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d): India’s relationship with an y country stands on its own footing and is 
independent of the relations of these countries with third countries. 
 Government keeps a vigilant watch on  all developments, including in the 
neighbouring countries, which have a bearin g on India’s national security, and takes 
all necessary measures to safeguard it. 
 Neighbourhood First Policy continue s to guide our approach to our 
neighbouring countries. It has resulted in  outcome-oriented engagements, strong 
development partnerships, physical, digi tal and economic connectivity as well as 
vibrant people to people and cultural exch anges. We are confident of the structural 
strength of these ties and believe that they have a unique value for our partners. 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
47

 
 As a Vishwa-Bandhu, India has taken init iatives in providing solutions to many 
contemporary global problems.   India has constructively, and in concrete ways, 
championed the cause of holistic human- centric development and self-reliance 
capabilities of countries in the Global South. Throughout its G20 Presidency, India 
worked to ensure that the concerns and priorities of the Global South received due 
cognizance in various verticals of the G20, and were duly fa ctored in finding solutions 
to the most pressing contemporary global challenges.  
 India has consistently piloted new init iatives at multilateral and plurilateral 
groupings, including the International Sola r Alliance (ISA), the Coalition for Disaster 
Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI), the Indo-P acific Oceans Initiative (IPOI) and the 
Mission Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE). Th ese and other such initiatives not only 
speak for India and put forward India’s viewpo int on global issues  such as reformed 
multilateralism, peace and security, climate change, transnational crime, terrorism, 
cyber-security, energy and food security  etc., but serve as the voice of peace, 
security and prosperity for all.  
  
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, since 1950s, China has been 
illegally squatting on 36,000 sq uare kilometers of our land in Aksai Chin largely 
because of the incompetence and ineptitude handling of the Government of the day 
and the then Prime Minister. Because Aksai Chin  is an integral part of India, we show 
it in our maps and Bangladesh has been  showing both Aksai Chin and Arunachal 
Pradesh in its map since 1971. But, recen tly, THE Chinese Government has asked 
Bangladesh not to show Aksai Chin and Arunachal in its map. Sir, is the Ministry 
going to do something about it? This has happened after the chan ge of Government 
in Bangladesh. We should intervene and te ll Bangladesh Government in no uncertain 
terms that they cannot do so.  Would the Minister elaborate? 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH: Sir, the hon. Member has raised a very old issue. With 
the recent change in political dispensati on in Bangladesh, we are taking full 
cognizance and we are keepin g full watch on the developments there.  We take all 
possible measures to safeguard our securi ty, national integrit y and our national 
borders.  Regarding the matter which the ho n. Member has raised, this is a matter 
which is not really very rele vant to the question that was asked. The question deals 
with the growing influence of China in ou r neighbouring countries and what we are 
doing to counteract it. This is a particular  matter related to the Defence Ministry and 
Home Minister. Sir, I would seek your protec tion regarding this question. I assure the 
hon. Member that any further details that he want, it can be sought from the Ministry. 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you hon. Minister. Hon. Minister has committed. 
He will give you the details.  Shri Milind Murli Deora.  
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA: Sir, I thank you for indulging me and giving me the 
time. This time, my question is more specifi c relating to the topic. The question is 
about China’s influence on India’s friendly  countries. One issue we should keep in 
mind, especially, my young friends, who are Mo Ss in this Ministy, is that after Donald 
Trump became the President of the U.S., there is a move to shut down an 
organisation called USAID, which provides assistance to many countries, especially, 
in the global South. With the collapse of the USAID’s funds to the global South, 
especially, South-East Asia and other regi ons where India enjoys very good relations, 
before anyone else fills that vacuum, it  would be a good idea if the Government 
increases its developmental assistance from India to ensure that no hostile country 
towards India fill that gap. 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH: Sir, regarding our neighbou rhood countries, we have 
established a very comprehensive and well-oiled mechanisms for bilateral 
engagements with all our partner countries. Our foreign policy is also multi-
dimensional with omni-directional approach under the hon. Prime Minister’s guidance 
of following our ancient custom of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam.  Providing of 
development assistance and capacity building as per the needs of the aspirations of 
our neighbours remains the highlight of our policy of neighbourhood first. Under 
BIMSTEC, we have hosted disaster management exercises, centres for weather, 
climate and energy and also provided a number of capacity building support.  
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Sir, we continue to support our neighbours in their development needs and 
capacity building and continue to bolster our trade and economic ties. Regardless of 
the change in the situation in the world, we  will continue to maintain our relations and 
we continue to accord highest priority to  our relations with our neighbours. Thank 
you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary; Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, China is encroaching the Indian economy for marketing 
their products. I also want to know from  the Minister whether we are having good 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
49

 
relations with our neighbours. Sri Lanka is one of the neighbouring countries. Now the 
new Government has come over in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan President came and 
met our Prime Minister here and also went  to China. In these circumstances, when 
we are already facing a lot of issues like Katchatheevu issue and fisherman issue, if 
China is influencing Sri Lanka, what actio ns is the Central Government taking to 
protect our fishermen and Indian interest when Sri Lanka is creating problems? The 
relationship between China and Sri Lanka is getting very close. It is threatening to 
India and Tamil people also. I just want to know what steps the Government is going 
to take. 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH : Sir, I would like to reiterate that India’s relationships 
with our neighbouring countries are based on historical ties, cultural exchanges, 
people-to-people contact and ancient trade routes. Sir, re gardless of what the other 
country in the world is doing, we continue to accord highest priority to our relationship 
with our neighbours and we continue to proceed on our development assistance and 
any other assistance that our neighbors require, including a security assistant.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Question Hour over… 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH: Sir, he raised a sensitive issue regarding the Sri Lankan 
fishermen.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  Complete it.  Be brief. 
 
SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH : Sir, I would like to remind the hon. Member that this 
question is already listed in the House.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Question Hour over.  
 
 
1.00 P.M. 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I am seized of an  undated notice for motion, 
received on 13th  December 2024 bearing 55 purported sign atures of the members of 
the Rajya Sabha, seeking removal from o ffice of Justice Shekhar Yadav of the 
Allahabad High Court under Article 124(4) of the Constitution. 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
  The jurisdiction for the stated subject matter constitutionally lies  in exclusivity 
with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha and, in an  eventuality, with the Parliament and 
Hon'ble President.  
 Taking note of public domain information and inputs available, it is appropriate 
that the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha shares this, for information, with the 
Secretary General, Supreme Court of India.
 
 
$THE UNION BUDGET, 2025-26– Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, further discussion on the Union Budget 2025-26.   On the 11 th 
February 2025, Shrimati Darshana Sing h had not concluded her speech while 
participating in the discussion. Therefore,  I call upon Shrimati Darshana Singh to 
continue her speech.  Now, Shrimati  Darshana  Singh. 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश):  सर, आपने मुझे इस वषर् क े बजट 2025-26 पर पुन: बोलने 
का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करती हूं।  
 
( उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए। ) 
 
 महोदय, मȅ आपको इस सदन क े मा ध्यम  से बताना चाहूंगी िक यह बजट िसफर् एक वािर्षक 
बजट नहीं है, बिÊक यह बजट 2047 क े  िवकिसत भारत का रोड मैप है, जो 140 करोड़  
देशवािसयȗ की आशा, आकांक्षाओं को पूरा करने वाला बजट है।  यह बजट गरीब कÊयाण, युवा, 
िकसान एवं मिहला क े िव
कास को समिर्पत बजट है।    
महोदय, िकसान हमारी देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा की रीढ़ है। इसिलए समृǉ समाज क े िलए 
समृǉ िकसान का होना बहुत जरूरी है।  महोदय, इस बजट मȂ हमारे देश क े अन्नदाता िकसानȗ 
क े िलए कर् ेिड
ट काडर् क े ऋण की सीमा को 3 लाख से बढ़ाकर 5 लाख कर िदया गया है।  इसका 
लाभ देश क े लगभग 10 करोड़ िकसानȗ को िमलेगा और साथ ही उǄर Ģदेश क े सवा दो करोड़ 
िकसान भाइयȗ को इसका लाभ िमलेगा।  इससे हमारे िकसान भा इयȗ को जरूरत  पड़ने पर िकसी 
क े सामने हाथ नहीं फ ैलाना पड़ेगा और वह आत्मसÇमान से अपना जीवन जी सके गा। महोदय, 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का हमेशा से यह मानना रहा है िक जब देश का िकसान समृǉ और 
संपन्न होगा, तभी देश उन्नित और िवकास की िदशा मȂ सही मायने मȂ आगे बढ़ेगा।  इसिलए इस 
बजट मȂ Ģधानमंतर्ी धन-धा
न्य क ृिष योजना की शुरुआत  की जा रही है, िजससे इसका सीधा लाभ 
देश क े लगभ ग 10 करोड़ िकसान भाइयȗ को होगा।   
                                                            
$ Further discussion continued from the 11th February, 2025. 
 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
51

 
महोदय, जैसा िक हम जानते हȅ िक सरकार उवर्रक उत्पादन मȂ तेजी लाने क े िलए 
Ģितबǉ है, तािक इस देश क े िकसान यूिरया क े मामले मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बन सकȂ और पयार्Ãत मातर्ा मȂ 
उन्हȂ यूिरया की सÃलाई हो सके ।  इस िदशा मȂ सरकार ने कई आवÌयक कदम भी उठाए हȅ। 
सरकार ने पूवȘǄर क्षेतर् मȂ बंद पड़े तीन यूिरया संयंतर्ȗ को िफर से शुरू  करने की घोषणा की है, 
िजससे िक
सान भाइयȗ को पयार्Ãत मातर्ा मȂ यूिरया िमल सके गा। असम क े नामरूप  मȂ यूिरया 
उत्पादन क े िलए एक नय
ा संयंतर् Îथािपत िकया जाएगा।  महोदय, इसके  साथ मȅ एक बात और 
इसमȂ जोड़ना चाहती हूं िक 2014 से पहले - मȅ चूंिक उǄर Ģदेश से हूं - मȅ बताना चाहूंगी िक एक 
समय ऐसा था िक जब हमारे िकसान भाइयȗ को यूिरया क े िलए लंबी लाइनȗ मȂ खड़ा होना पड़ता 
था।  उनको यूिरया तो नहीं िमलती थी, लेिकन कभी-कभी पुिलस की लाठीचाजर् मȂ उनक
ी िपटाई 
जरूर  हो जाती थी।  इस तरह का जो माहौल था, इससे इस देश क े िकसान
ȗ को िनकालने क े िलए 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस तरह की योजनाएँ बनाईं।   
 महोदय, सरकार ने अथर्ËयवÎथा की सबसे महत्त्वपूणर् कड़ी, मध्यम वगर् की आिर्थक 
योजना सुदृढ़ करने क े उǈेÌय से उनकी 12 लाख तक की आय को टैक्स ģी करने का का म िकया 
है, िजससे मध्यम वगर् क े हाथ मȂ पयार्Ãत धन होगा।  इससे उनकी जो purchasing power है , वह 
बढ़ेगी और देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा मजबूत होगी।   
 महोदय, इस बजट मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार ने विरÍ
ठ नागिरकȗ को 
टैक्स मȂ राहत देने का ऐलान िकया है।  अब विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को िमलने वाले Åयाज पर टैक्स छू ट 
की सीमा 50,000 रुपए  से बढ़ा कर एक लाख रुपए  कर दी गई है।  इससे सीिनयर िसिटजन को 
ज्यादा बचत करने मȂ मदद िमलेगी और उनकी आिर्थक िÎथित मजबूत होगी।   
 महोदय, इस बजट मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार ने देश क े युवाओं को 
आत्मिनभर्र बनाने और रोजगार क े नए अवसर देने क े िलए कई अहम कदम उठाए हȅ। ...(समय की 
घं
टी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीया दशर्ना जी, आप conclude किरए, आपका समय खत्म हो गया है। 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह: सर, मȅ conclude कर रही हूँ।  मह ोदय, यह बजट युवाओं की िशक्षा, 
रोजगार और आत्मिनभर्रता को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए बनाया गया है।   
 महोदय, आज माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े Ģयास से भारतीय रेल आम जन को 
िवÌवÎतरीय सुिवधाएँ मुहैया करा रही है।  इस कर्म मȂ इस बज ट मȂ 100 अमृत भारत, 50 नमो 
भारत और 200 वंदे भारत टर्ेनȂ बनाई और चलाई जाएँगी। ...(समय की घंटी)...  इससे याितर्यȗ को 
सुिवधा िमलेगी।   
 महोदय, बस मȅ अपनी एक और बात कहते हुए conclude कर रही हूँ।  महोदय, माननीया 
िवǄ मंतर्ी, िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने लगातार आठवीं बार बजट पेश िक
या है।  मȅ इसके  िलए 
माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई और शुभकामना देती हूँ।  साथ ही, मȅ आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का आभार Ģकट करती हूँ, िजनके  नेतृत्व मȂ 2047 क े िव
किसत भारत क े िवज़न को 
मजबूती देने वाला बजट पेश हुआ है।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद।  माननीय Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी जी। आपके  पास 15 िमनट्स हȅ।   
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी (महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित महोदय, आपका धन्यवाद। किव सुदामा पांडेय 
'धूिमल' जी ने कहा था: 
 
    एक आदमी रोटी बेलता है,  
  एक आदमी रोटी खाता है,  
  एक तीसरा आदमी भी है,  
  जो न रोटी बेलता है, न रोटी खाता है,  
  वह िसफर् रोटी से खेलता है।   
  वह तीसर
ा आदमी कौन है?  
  मेरे देश की संसद मौन है। 
 
 उपसभापित महोदय, वे भी क्या िदन थे, जब संसद मȂ देश का बजट पेश हो
 ता था, तो देश 
की सड़कȂ ठहर जाया करती थीं; रेल बजट पेश होता था, तो लोगȗ की उÇमीदȂ रेल क े िडÅबȗ की 
तरह पटिरयȗ पर दौड़ने लगती थीं। पूरा देश धड़कनȂ रोक कर िवǄ मंतर्ी और रेल मंतर्ी को सुना 
करता था।  अफसोस, अब बजट पेश हो जाता है, मीिडया चैनÊ
स सरकार का मिहमामंडन करती 
हȅ और बेचारी जनता बजट क े आँकड़ȗ क े शÅदजाल मȂ उलझी हुई महीनȗ बाद समझ पाती है िक 
उसका तो िफर से कट गया। 
 उपसभापित महोदय, िपछले दो साल अमृतकाली
न बजट पेश िकए गए और इस बार एक 
नई शÅदावली गढ़ी गई है - तुिÍटकरण बनाम संतुिÍटकरण का बजट। उपसभापित महोदय, सुनने 
मȂ िकतना अलंकािरक लगता है यह शÅद! सोच रहा हूँ िक देश की िवǄ मंतर्ी और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
से पूछू ँ िक आिखर िकस
की संतुिÍट! िजस बजट मȂ मनरेगा क े िलए एक रुपए  की बढ़ोतरी न हो, 
वही पुराना 86,000 करोड़, जबिक पहले ही 9,754 करोड़ का घाटा हो; िजस मनरेगा से करोड़ȗ 
मजदूरȗ क े घर मȂ चूÊहा जलता हो, उस मनरेगा मȂ काम करने वाले गरीब मजदूरȗ क े िलए अगर 
आपके  खजाने से एक रुपया भी इज़ाफ
ी नहीं िनकल सका, तो भला कौन संतुÍट हुआ साहब!  इस 
देश का गरीब मजदूर या आपके  उǏो
गपित दोÎत! वे, जो महाराÍटर् मȂ लोक सभा और िवधान सभा 
क े बीच मȂ 40 लाख मतदाता बढ़ाए गए थे,उन्हीं क े िलए मनरेगा का थोड़ा सा बजट बढ़ा देते।  क्या 
उन 40 लाख  लोगȗ मȂ मनरेगा का एक भी मजदूर नहीं था? क्या सारे क े सारे 12 लाख की छू ट 
वाले थे, आगे क े लोग थे?  
 उपसभापित महोदय, कल जब िवǄ मंतर्ी जी देश की संसद मȂ भाषण दे रही थीं, तो वहाँ 
मुÇबई मȂ कोई गरीब इंसान जब अपनी जेब टटोल कर अपनी मोटरसाइिकल मȂ एक लीटर पेटर्ोल 
भरवा रहा था, तो उस पेटर्ोल की कीमत थी 103 रुपए  Ģित ली
टर! आिखर इतना महंगा पेटर्ोल-
डीजल खरीद कर कौन संतुÍट हो रहे हȅ - इस देश क े गरीब लोग या िफर सरकार क े चहेते 
धन्नासेठ?  
उपसभापित महोदय, िव
Ǆ मंतर्ी जी इस बजट को मध्यम वगर् को संतुÍट करने वाला बजट 
बता रही हȅ। मैडम, हम-आप यहां पर बैठे रहते हȅ और वहां बाहर, इसी िद Êली मȂ, एक लीटर दूध, 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
53

 
चाहे वह 'अमूल' का हो या िफर 'मदर डेरी' का हो, उसकी कीमत 73 रुपय े Ģित लीटर है।  इसे 
इतना महंगा दूध बेच करके  कौन संतुÍट हो रहा है - गरीब जनता या आपके  धन्नासेठ दोÎत?  
महोदय, इस सरकार का बाजार और महंगाई पर कोई िन यंतर्ण नहीं रह गया है।  चाहे देश मȂ 
लहसुन 400 रुपय े Ģित िकलो िबक जाए, टमाटर 100 रुपय े Ģित िकलो िबक जाए, Ãयाज का दाम 
सुनकर आंखȗ मȂ आंसू आ जाए, लेिकन िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया बजट मȂ महंगाई का ' म' भी नहीं 
बोलती हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ बच्चȗ की िक
ताब और पȂिसल तक पर टैक्स लगाने वाली सरकार 
से पूछना चाहता हूं िक आप खुद को मध्यम वगर् का िहतैषी बताते हȅ,  खुद को धािर्मक कहने वाली 
सरकार, भगवान Ǜीकृ Íण क े िĢय खाǏ पदाथș, दही और मक्खन तक पर जीएसटी लगाती है 
और बात करती है - मध्यम वगर् की िहमायती होने की! िंजदा रहती हुई जनता से हर चीज पर 
टैक्स वसूलने वाली यह सरकार, कम से कम मरने पर तो लोगȗ को बख्श देती, लेिकन नहीं, वहां 
भी £ है। अंितम संÎकार क े सामानȗ, जैसे -  अगरबǄी, धूपबǄी, क ेवड़ा जल, चंदन पाउडर, जौ, 
बताशा, काला ितल, पंचरत्न, कपूर और कफन तक पर टैक्स लेने वाली यह सरकार िकस मुंह से 
खुद को मध्यम वगर् का िहतैषी बताती है? कौन सी संतुिÍट, िकसकी संतुिÍट? कदम-कदम पर 
टैक्स देकर £ वाली जनता की या िफर जनता से टैक्स वसूल करके  धन्नासेठȗ का खजाना भरने 
वाली सरकार की - िकसकी संतुिÍट हो रही है?  
उपसभापित महोदय, 18 अगÎत, 2015, िबहार क े आरा का ऐितहािसक मैदान,  सजा हुआ 
मंच, हजारȗ की भीड़ और सामने खड़े हुए देश क े Ģधानमंतर्ी का भाषण – िबहार क े    भाइयȗ-
बहनȗ आज मȅ  िबहार क े िलए पैक े ज की घोषणा कर रहा हूँ। 50 हजार  क
रोड़ कर दूं िक ज्यादा 
कर दूं;  60 हजार करोड़ कर दूं िक ज्यादा कर दूं;  70 हजार करोड़ कर दूं िक ज् यादा कर दूं;  80 
हजार करोड़ कर दूं िक ज्यादा कर दूं; चलो, मȅ िबहार को सवा लाख करोड़ का पैक े ज दे रहा हूं।  
महोदय, 10 साल हो गए, लेिकन वही ढाक क े तीन पात।  िबहार आज भी िवकास की बाट जो रहा 
है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का वह भाषण आज भी Youtube Channel पर सुना जा सकता है।   
 
  जो * बोल क े करता है मुतमइन सबको, 
वो * बोल क े खुद मुतमइन नहीं होता।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: इमरान जी, आपको * शÅद क े बारे मȂ मालूम है।  It will not go on record. 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : उपसभापित महोदय, यह तो राहुल जी का असर है।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will not go on record. 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : सर, कौन सा शÅद? 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
* Not recorded. 
 
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Ǜी उपसभापित :* शÅद को आप जानते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : ठीक है, सर।    
 
 जो िमथ्या बोल क े करता है मुतमइन सबको, 
                                        वह िमथ्या बोल क े खुद मुतमइन नहीं होता।  
 
सर, यह राहुल जी का असर है, जो मखाना बोडर् की घोषणा हुई। अिखलेश जी, आपको 
याद होगा िक "भारत जोड़ो न्याय यातर्ा" मȂ 30 जनवरी, 2024 को िबहार क े पूिर्णया मȂ, रंगभूिम 
मैदान मȂ राहुल गांधी जी का भाषण था और उसमȂ उन्हȗने मखाना को लेकर आवाज उठाई थी।  
यह उनका असर है िक आपको मखाना बोडर् बनाना पड़ा, वरना आप तो मय
खाना बोडर् बनाने वाले 
लोग हȅ। 
 उपसभापित महोदय, िबहार को असत्य पैक े ज और चुनावी िदलासे देना बंद किरए।  
आज भी जब कोसी मȂ बाढ़ आती है, तो पूरा सीमांचल बरबाद हो जाता है। मȅने उस तबाही को 
अपनी आंखȗ से देखा है।  2016-17 की बाढ़ मȂ मȅने अपने इन्हीं हाथȗ से वहाँ राहत सामगर्ी बांटी है।  
अगर सच मȂ आप िबहार क े िलए क ु छ करना चा
हते हȅ, तो िबहार को बाढ़ से बचाने का Ģबंध 
किरए।  पूिर्णया एयरपोटर् 10 साल  से बाट जोह रहा है।  उसके  िलए घोषणा 2014 मȂ हुई, लेिकन 
वह आज तक बन कर तैयार नहीं हुआ। अलीगढ़ मुिÎलम िवÌविवǏालय का िकश नगंज सȂटर 
बजट क े अभाव मȂ दम तोड़ता जा रहा है। मȅने िपछले बजट सतर् मȂ भी आवाज उठाई थी और आज 
िफर मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी से दामन फ ैला कर क े अनुरोध कर ना चाहता हूं िक अलीगढ़ मुिÎलम 
िवÌविवǏालय का िकशनगंज सȂटर बन जाने दीिजए।  आिखर कौन सी नफरत है? यह मुÊक 
हमारा भी है, इस मुÊक की िमƺी मȂ हमारा भी खून-पसीना शािमल है।  हमसे इतनी भी क्या 
नफरत! 
 िरÌ
तȗ की ये नाजुक डोरȂ तोड़ी थोड़ी जाती हȅ, 
अपनी आंखȂ दुखती हȗ तो फोड़ी थोड़ी जाती हȅ। 
 
उपसभापित महोदय, अÊपसंख्यक मंतर्ालय का बजट काटकर, मौलाना आज़ाद नेशनल 
फ ेलोिशप बंद कर देना, Ģी-मैिटर्क Îकॉलरिशप बंद कर देना, नई मंिज ल योजना बंद करना, 
धरोहर योजना बंद करना.. 2024-25 क े बजट मȂ माइनॉिरटी िमिनÎटर्ी क े िलए 3,183 करोड़ 
रुपए  की घोषणा हुई, लेिकन देश को हैरत होगी िक बाद मȂ समीक्षा करके  इसको लगभग आधा 
कर िदया गया, 1,868 करोड़ रुपए  कर िदया ग या। मेरा तो सरकार से पूछना है िक कौन संतुÍट 
हुआ - इस देश का अÊपसंख्यक संतुÍट हुआ या आप संतुÍट हुए?  िकसका संतुिÍटकरण हुआ है?  
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी से कहना चाहता हूं िक आपने ही 1 माचर्, 2018 को 
जॉडर्न क े िंकग अÅदुÊला को मेहमान बना कर इसी िदÊली मȂ एक कॉन्
ģȂ स मȂ कहा था िक मȅ 
मुसलमानȗ क े एक हाथ मȂ क ंÃयूटर और दूसरे हाथ मȂ क ुरान देना चाहता हूं। क ंÃयूटर देने की बा त 
तो छोिड़ए, पढ़ाई क े िलए जो Îकॉलरिशप िमल रही थी, उसको भी आपने छीन िलया। आपने ऐसा 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
55

 
िकसको संतुÍट करने क े िलए िकया है?  हम इस £ को समझते हȅ। आप माइनॉिरटी िमिनÎटर्ी का 
बजट काटते-काटते एक िदन िमिनÎटर्ी को ही बंद कर देना चाहते हȅ।   
 
 वो ज़हर देता तो सबकी नज़र मȂ आ जाता 
सो ये िकया िक हमȂ वƪ पर दवायȂ न दीं। 
 
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ तो आपके  माध्यम से िवǄ मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहता हूँ िक शायद 
आपको पता ही नहीं है िक गृहÎथी चलाने वाली एक गृिहणी की मुिÌकलȂ क्य
ा-क्या होती हȅ। आपने 
कभी सोचा भी नहीं होगा िक जब वह िकचन मȂ सÅजी बनाने क े िलए कढ़ ाई मȂ तेल डालती है, तो 
उसके  साथ उसके  आँसू भी िगरते हȅ। उपसभापित महोदय, शायद उन्हȂ पता भी न हो िक एक 
छोटी-सी गाड़ी और एक छोटे-से Äलैट का ईएमआई भरने क े बाद इस देश का एक ग रीब इंसान 
जब अपने बच्चȗ की फीस भरने क े बारे मȂ सोचता है, तो उसे िकतनी खुिशयȗ का गला घȗटना 
पड़ता है।  शायद उनको पता भी नहीं है िक फसल बेच कर िबिटया की शादी का सपना सजाने 
वाला िकसान जब अपनी फसल बर
बाद देखता है, तो वह  िकतनी रातȂ सो भी नहीं पाता है।  
उपसभापित महोदय, शायद वे कभी इस पीड़ा को समझ नहीं पाएँगी िक पिरवार क े िकसी एक 
सदÎय को क ȅसर जैसी बीमारी हो जाए, तो घर और जमीनȂ िगरवी हो जाती हȅ, लेिकन इलाज नहीं 
हो पाता।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, इसी देश की संसद मȂ कभी Îवगीर्य सुषमा Îवराज जी ने कहा था 
िक जब-जब देश की करȂसी िगरती है, तब-तब देश की ĢितÍठा िगरती है। एक तरफ कोलंिबया 
जैसा छोटा-सा देश और उसके  Ģधान मंतर्ी गुÎतावो पेटर्ो खड़े हȅ, जो कोलंिबया क े नाग
िरकȗ को 
हथकड़ी लगा कर लाने वाले जहाज को अमेिरका बैरंग वापस लौटा दे रहे हȅ और दूसरी तरफ 
हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी खड़े हȅ, जो बेड़ी और हथकड़ी लगा कर लाए गए बेटȗ क े अप
मान पर एक 
शÅद नहीं बोल रहे हȅ।   
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इितहास क े पन्ने पलट रहा हूँ, मुझे दो िकरदार याद आ रहे हȅ -  
एक तरफ िनक्सन क े सातवȂ बेड़े की धमिकयȗ क े सामने लोहे की तरह अिडग इंिदरा गांधी खड़ी 
हȅ, तो दूसरी तरफ खुद ही 'नमÎते टर्ंप' का नारा लगाते हुए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी खड़े हȅ। मेरे कानȗ मȂ 
सुषमा Îवराज जी की आवाज गूँज रही है। बहुत कम बोलने वाले डा. मन
मोहन िंसह जी ने बहुत 
ज्यादा बोलने वाले Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को जब देश की बागडोर सȚपी थी, तो एक डॉलर 58 रुपए  का 
था, आज 85 से 87 क े बी
च मȂ झूल रहा है। इन िदनȗ रुपए  की अहिमयत िगरती है, तो न तो देश 
की ĢितÍठा िगरती है, न Ģधान मंतर्ी की गिरमा।   
उपसभापित महोदय, िजस देश मȂ 80 करोड़ लोगȗ को पाँच िकलो राशन क े िलए कतारȗ 
मȂ लगना पड़ता हो, उस देश मȂ यह सरकार 12 लाख रुपए  तक क े टैक्स न लेने क े िलए अपनी 
पीठ थप-थपा रही है।  
 हुक़ ूमत इस क़दर आवाम पर एहसान करती है 
                                 ये आँखȂ छीनती है और चÌमे दान करती है। 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 उपसभापित महोदय, महाराÍटर् का िभवंडी हो, मालेगाँव हो, इचलकरंजी हो, यूपी का 
बनारस हो, मऊआईमा हो,  मु बारकपुर हो, रांची का छोटा नागपुर हो, िबहार का भागलपुर हो - 
हर जगह बुनकरȗ की उÇमीदȂ तोड़ रही हȅ, लेिकन इस सरकार क े पास उनके  िलए क ु छ भी नहीं 
है। मुरादाबाद का पीतल उǏोग, कानपुर का चमड़ा उǏोग, सहारनपुर का लकड़ी उǏोग, 
िफरोजाबाद का चूड़ी उǏोग, अलीगढ़ का ताला उǏो
ग - सब सरकारी Ãलािंनग से तबाह हो रहे 
हȅ। इन तमाम क े बीच सरकारी सपोटर् से बस एक उǏोग फल-फ ू ल रहा है - नोएडा का नफरत 
उǏोग।  
उपसभापित महोदय, िजस देश मȂ 40 से  45 परस Ȃट मेिडकल फ ैकÊटी की सीट्स खाली 
हȗ, वहां बजट मȂ 75,000 नए मेिडकल सीट्स का ऐलान हो रहा है। सरकार बहादुर कम-से-कम 
इस देश क े पढ़े-िलखे युवाओं को तो मूखर् समझ
ना बंद किरए। 75,000 मेिडकल सीट्स बाद मȂ 
बनाइएगा,  पहले एÇस मȂ जो 2,161 पद खाली पड़े हȅ, उनको तो भर दीिजए। 
 
वो अब ितजारत पहलू िनकाल लेता है 
मȅ क ु छ कहूँ तो तराज़ू िन काल लेता है। 
मȅ इसिलए भी तेरे फ़न की क़दर् करता हूँ 
तू * बोल क े आँसू िनकाल लेता है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय, आप जो भी असंसदीय शÅद बोल रहे हȅ, वह  िरकॉडर् पर नहीं 
जाएगा। * शÅद वगैरह िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगा। 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी: सर, मȅ उस शÅद की जगह िमथ्या कर दे रहा हूँ।  आप उस शÅद को हटा 
दीिजएगा। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी जी, आप इस बात का ध्यान रखȂ िक ऐसे जो भी शÅद हȗगे, वे 
िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएँगे। 
 
 Ǜी इमरान Ģताप
गढ़ी: उपसभापित महोदय, काश यह बजट बीपीएससी क े पेपर लीक की 
िशकायत करने वाले नौजवानȗ पर बरसती हुई पुिलस की लािठयȗ क े जख्मȗ पर मरहम लगा 
पाता।  उपसभापित महोदय, िपछले 80 िदन से 70 साल का एक बुजुगर् एमएसपी की लीग ल गारंटी 
मांगता हुआ आमरण अनशन पर बैठा हुआ है।  काश यह बजट िकसान नेता जगजीत डÊलेवाल 
की ट ूटती हुई साँसȗ की पीड़ा सुन पाता। काश यह बजट Ģितयोगी परीक्षाओं की  तैयारी   क े   िलए   
िदÊली,  कोटा, पटना, अहमदाबाद, इलाहाबाद जैसे शहरȗ मȂ िकताबȗ क े साथ गल रहे युवाओं क े 
सपनȗ को िंजदगी दे पा
ता। काश, यह बजट वंदे भारत क े सुनहरे िवजुअÊस की बजाय देश की 
गरीब जनता को क ु छ और पैसȂजर टर्ेनȂ दे पाता; काश, यह बजट सीिनयर िसटीजंस को टर्ेन 
िटकटȗ मȂ िम
लने वाली िरयायतȂ वापस लौटा पाता, िजनको सरकार ने कोिवड क े नाम पर छीन 
                                                            
* Not recorded.  
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
57

 
िलया था; काश, यह बजट िकसानȗ की राह मȂ कीलȂ नहीं, बिÊक कालीन िबछाने वाला बन पाता; 
काश, यह बजट सरकारी मािलकȗ को यह समझा पाता िक नेहरू  को कोसने से अथर्ËयवÎथा नहीं 
सुधरेगी, उसके  िलए डा. मनमोहन िंसह साहब की अथर्नीित अपनानी पड़ेगी।  आप िपछले 11 साल 
से नेहरू  जी को कोस रहे हȅ, आिखर कब तक कोिसएगा? थोड़ा पंिडत नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ पिढ़ए, 
तब पता चलेगा िक पंिडत नेहरू  िक
स शिख्सयत का नाम है। दुिनया का पहला ऐसा राजनेता, 
िजसने देश की आजादी क े िलए अपनी िंजदगी क े 3,259  िद
न अंगर्ेजȗ की जेल मȂ िबताए। पंिडत 
नेहरू  एक ऐसे महान शख्स थे, िजनके  िपता पंिडत मोतीलाल नेहरू , िजनकी बहन िवजयलÑमी 
पंिडत, िजनके  बहनोई पंिडत रंजीत सीताराम, िजनकी बेटी इंिदरा गांधी, िजनके  दामाद िफरोज 
गांधी, सबने अंगर्ेजȗ से लड़ते हुए Îवतंतर्ता आंदोलन मȂ जेल काटी।  आप िकस मुंह से उनकी 
लकीर छोटी करने की बात करते हȅ? नहीं कर पाइएगा, सात जन्मȗ मȂ नहीं कर पाइएगा, क्यȗिक: 
 
 िजÎम की मौ
त कोई मौत नहीं होती है,  
िजÎम िमट जाने से इंसान नहीं मर जाते,  
धड़कनȂ रुकन े से अरमान नहीं मर जाते, 
सांसȂ थम जाने से ऐलान नहीं मर जाते, 
िजÎम की मौत कोई मौत नहीं होती है। 
 
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  साम
ने खड़ा होकर एक बहुत छोटी-सी कहानी सुनाना 
चाहता हूँ।  महान बादशाह िसकं दर ने जब यूनान फतेह िकया, तो जीत का जÌन मनाने क े िलए 
वह शहर की सड़कȗ पर िनकला।  उसने देखा िक पूरा शहर तो जÌन मना रहा है, लेिकन एक 
फकीर सड़क क े िकनारे चादर तान
कर सो रहा है। िसकं दर को गुÎसा आया, वह घोड़े से उतरा, 
उस फकीर क े पास गया और उसे सोता देखकर उसे जोर की एक लात म ारी और लात मार क े 
कहा िक क्यȗ रे फकीर, मȅने यूनान फतेह कर िलया, लोग जÌन मना रहे हȅ और तू सो रहा है।  उस 
फकीर ने उनींदी  आंखȗ से िसकं दर को देखा और कहा िक शहर जीतना बादशाहȗ का काम है, 
लेिकन लात मारना तो गधे का का
म है! 
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इनसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक गरीब जनता को लात मारना बंद 
कीिजए।  यह अमीरȗ क े िलए बनाया गया बजट है। यह िनराशाजनक बजट है। हम अमृत काल, 
अमृत काल सुनते आ रहे थे, यह अमृत काल इत
नी जÊदी समाÃत हो गया िक अब अमृत काल का 
कोई नाम तक नहीं लेना चाहता है।  इसिलए, मȅ इस सदन मȂ खड़े होकर देश की िवǄ मंतर्ी 
महोदया से कहना चाहता हूँ िक आपने अÊपसंख्यकȗ क े बजट मȂ जो कटौती की है, उसको बहाल 
कीिजए।  आपने मनरेगा को जो िÎथर रखा है, उसका घाटा  9,754  करोड़ है, कम से कम उतना 
बढ़ा करके  िफर से उसे बहाल कीिजए। ...(समय की घं टी )... नौजवानȗ को रोजगार दीिजए, 
िकसानȗ को एमएसपी की लीगल गारंटी दीिजए, यही मȅ आपसे अपील कर रहा हूँ।  सर, आपने 
मुझे जो इतना समय िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।    
                                                                                         
Ǜी बालयोगी उमेशनाथ (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपने मुझे राÍटर् पित जी क े 
अिभभाषण पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए धन्यवाद!   
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और राÍटर्पित जी क े बहुत ऊ ं चे िवचार और ऊ ंची सोच क े माध्यम 
से राÍटर्पित जी का भाषण बहुत संतुिलत और बहुत ËयविÎथत है।  भारत की िवकास यातर्ा और 
अमृत काल को अभूतपूवर् उपलिÅधयां ĢाÃत हुई हȅ। हम यह मानकर चलते हȅ िक देश मȂ बहुत लंबे 
समय से धारा 370 भी चल रही थी और उससे लाखȗ की ता
दाद मȂ लोग जूझ रहे थे।  इधर, Ǜीराम 
जन्मभूिम, जो िपछले  1,000  साल की समÎया थी, उसका समाधान होने मȂ बहुत िवलंब हुआ।  
उसके  िलए 500  साल तक इस देश क े ऋिष-मुिनयȗ ने संघषर् िकया और वह संघषर् का काल पूणर् 
हुआ।  
महोदय, इस देश मȂ िनरंतर इंģा
Îटर्क्चर क े माध्यम से बहुत सारे रोड्स बने, कई पुल बने, 
िजससे अयोध्या तक जाने क े िलए ला
खȗ लोगȗ को खूब सारी सुिवधाएं ĢाÃत हुईं।  माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी क े "िकसान सÇमान िनिध" क े तहत करोड़ȗ िकसानȗ को िपछले महीने लगभग 4 करोड़, 
41 हजार रुपय े की रािश का भुगतान भी हुआ। ‘Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना’ का िवÎतार करते हुए 3 
करोड़ अितिरƪ पिरवारȗ को नए घर देने का िनणर्य िलया गया, इसके  िलए सरकार ने 5 लाख, 
36 हज़ार करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करने की योजना बनाई है। राÍटर्पित जी ने इस देश क े िहत क े िलए, 
िंचतन क े िलए िनरंतर अपना उǊोधन देकर पूरे राÍटर् क े लोगȗ को अिभभूत िकया है। बजट मȂ 
माननीय राÍटर्पित जी ने अंितम पंिƪ मȂ खड़े Ëयिƪ को दृिÍटगत रखते हुए उसके  िवकास की ओर 
ध्यान िदया है। ‘ अंत्योदय योजना’ की भावनाओं क े Ģित सरकार संकिÊपत रही है। गरीबȗ को 
रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान िमले - एक तरफ िपछले अनेकȗ वषș से हम यह बात सुनते आ रहे थे िक 
तुम हमको वोट दो, हम तुÇहȂ रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान दȂगे, लेिकन जब से इस देश मȂ माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की सरकार आई, तब से सबसे पहले गरीबȗ को रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान देने का 
संकÊप िलया गया। अभूतपूवर् ËयवÎथाएं Îथाई रूप  से िमलȂ, इस पर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का 
पूरा ध्यान क Ȃिदर्त रहा है और समाज उससे लाभािन्वत भी हुआ है। इन्हीं मूलभूत योजनाओं की 
वजह से देश मȂ 70 वषș क े बाद Ģत्येक नागिरक को ऐसा लग रहा है िक चाहे वह गाड़ी चलाने 
वाला हो, चाहे जूते पर पािलश करने वाला हो, चाहे िभक्षावृिǄ करने वाला हो, इस देश मȂ माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी मन, वचन, कमर् से सत्य, धमर् और अिंहसा क े साथ चल कर भारत क े िवकास मȂ 
हम सबको साथ लेकर चलने का जो संकÊप िलया है, वह बहुत ही सराहनीय है।  
देश मȂ नागिरकȗ को बेहतर ÎवाÎथ्य सुिवधा क े िलए 1,75,000 आयुÍमान मंिदर बने हȅ। एक 
तरफ लोग कहते हȅ िक क्या राम मंिदर बनने से इस देश का कÊयाण होगा,  लेिकन मȅ उन्हȂ बताना 
चाहता हूं िक आरोग्य मंिदर भी बने हȅ, िजनमȂ लोगȗ को असाध्य रोगȗ से मुिƪ िदलाई जाएगी, चाहे 
वह क ȅसर हो, डायिबटीज हो, टीबी हो, सब रोगȗ से मुिƪ िदलाई जाएगी। ऐसी ËयवÎथाओं मȂ 
समाज अगर्णी पंिƪ मȂ आए, उसके  िलए यह सरकार िनरंतर संकिÊपत है। िवपक्ष बोलता रहता है 
िक क्या मंिदर बनाने से भारत का कÊयाण होगा? तो मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक माननीय मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ जब से भारत की सरकार चल रही है, तब से भारत मȂ पूणर् रूप  से शांित बनी हुई है। 
लाखȗ-करोड़ȗ लोग डरावनी िज़न्दगी से मुƪ हुए हȅ। अब कहीं भी बम फटने की सूचना ĢाÃत नहीं 
होती है। धारा 370 क े साथ-साथ इस देश मȂ कहीं भी िकसी Ģकार की अशांित नहीं हुई है। आज 
इस देश मȂ सब लोग बहुत अमन और चैन से जी रहे हȅ।  
माननीय राÍटर्पित जी ने अपने अिभभाषण मȂ सभी लोगȗ क े जीवन क े िलए ध्यान िदया है, 
लेिकन क ु छ लोग राजनीित से Ģेिरत बजट बता रहे हȅ, जबिक बजट मȂ सभी बातȂ ऑथȂिटक हȅ।  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
59

 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर क े माध्यम से पूरे भारत को जोड़ िदया गया है और उधर माननीय मोदी जी 
का ऊ ंचा िवचार, ऊ ंची सोच, और ऊ ंचा िंचतन – ‘सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िवÌवास - 
सभी Ģकार हमȂ सामािजक समरसता क े रूप  मȂ देखने को िमल रहा है और जाित-पाित, पंथ, 
संĢदाय को एक तरफ रखकर इस देश मȂ सब लोगȗ क े िलए काम हो रहा है। जो काम 70 वषș मȂ 
नहीं हुए, वे क ेवल 10 वषș मȂ करके  िदखाए हȅ। Ǜी राम मंिदर की समÎया, जो िक बहुत पुरानी थी, 
उसका भी समाधान हुआ है और हमको ऐसा भी लगने लगा िक इस देश की सबसे बड़ी पंचायत, 
जो राज्यसभा और लोकसभा है, उनमȂ अनेकȗ ऋिषयȗ का नाम िलया गया है। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी क े आने क े बाद लोगȗ क े माथे पर ितलक लगा हुआ देखने को िमला है, हाथ मȂ रक्षा सूतर् बांधे 
हुए देखने को िमला है और इस देश मȂ सब लोगȗ को सनातन धमर् की परÇपरा क े साथ जीने का 
अिधकार िजस तरह से िमला है, मȅ समझता हूं िक घर-घर सनातन की चचार् हो रही है।  
माननीय राÍटर्पित जी का ध्यान इस देश क े गरीब से लेकर अमीर तक बना हुआ है। उनकी 
भावनाएं िबÊकु ल पिवतर् हȅ, उनका भाव ऐसा है, जैसे सबरी माता का भाव था, जो राम जी को 
िनरंतर 14 वषर् तक िनहारती रहीं। सबरी क े समान ही इस देश की राÍटर्पित जी हȅ। सबरी का भाव 
ितर्लोकी क े नाथ राम जी क े Ģित था, ठीक उसी Ģकार से राÍटर्पित जी का भाव इस देश की तमाम 
जनता की ओर बना हुआ है। मȅ राÍटर्पित जी क े अिभभाषण पर उनको पूणर् रूप  से धन्यवाद क े 
साथ-साथ अपनी  बात समाÃत करता हूं। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Dr. Sasmit Patra.  
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Sir, I stand here today, not just as a representative of 
my State, Odisha, but as the voice of a St ate that has been abandoned by this Union 
Budget.  This is not just neglect, but this is an affront to four-and-a-half-crore people 
of Odisha.  Let me remind this House, that the Odisha BJP, in its 2014 election 
manifesto, promised Special Category Status for Odisha.  Eleven years later, where is 
that promise, where is that status and where is the justice?  The Biju Janata Dal and 
our leader, Naveen Patnaikji, have been  constantly demanding Special Category 
Status for Odisha over the past two decad es. The four-and-a-half-crore people of 
Odisha are hopeful that the State will be provided Special Category Status.  It has not 
happened in this Budget.   
Odisha is the economic backbone of this  nation. Our coal, our iron ore, our 
minerals fuel India's progress, yet when Odisha asks for its fair share, this 
Government turns its back. We suffer cyclon es and natural disasters year after year 
after year, yet Delhi refuses to recognise our pain. This Budget showers favours on 
some, ignores others and treats Odisha like an afterthought. Is Odisha only good 
enough to extract minerals, coal and wealth, but not worthy of growth and support for 
the Special Category Status?   
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
I will conclude.  My time is out. In concluding, Odisha's resilience must be 
rewarded, not overlooked. If we expect ou r State to rebuild af ter every catastrophe, 
while continuing to fuel India's growth, then, we must ensure it receives this support.  
This Budget must not turn its back on Od isha. This is the decisive moment.  Please 
provide Special Category Status to Odisha through this Budget. Bande Utkala Janani!  
Jai Hind!  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Shri A.D. Singh - not present.  Shrimati P.T. Usha - not 
present.  Shri Abdul Wahab - not present.  Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav.  आपका  5  
minute का समय है। 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश):  उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे भारत को िवकिसत बनाने 
वाले बजट पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको आभार Ģकट करती हूं और आपके  
माध्यम से सदन को Ģणाम करती हूं।  
 सर, मȅ यूपी से आती हूं, तो महाकुं भ क े भËय आयोजन क े िलए बधाई देती हूं और वहां पर 
हुई अिĢय घटना पर अपनी शोक संवेदना भी Ëयƪ करती हूं। सर, 2014 से पहले अग
 र िकसी को 
काशी-िवÌवनाथ क े दशर्न करने होते थे, तो हम लोगȗ क े पास फोन आता था, मȅ अपनी बात भी 
कर रही हूं, तो जाने से भी डर लगता था और अयोध्या क े बारे मȂ तो क ु छ नहीं कह सकते थे। आज 
जो भी महाकुं भ मȂ जा रहे है, वे Ģयास कर रहे हȅ िक मȅ अयोध्या भी चला जाऊं  और काशी-
िवÌवनाथ क े दशर्न भी कर लूं। अगर यह सब हो पाया है, तो माननीय मोदी जी की वजह से हो 
पाया है।  अभी मȅ अपने एक साथी को सुन रही थी, उन्हȗने सनातन धमर् पर जो बात कही, वह पूरी 
चिर
ताथर् हो रही है।  
 उपसभापित जी, मȅ अभी माननीय राÍटर्पित जी क े अिभभाषण पर चचार् सुन रही थी और 
बजट पर अपने िवपक्ष क े भाई-बहनȗ को भी सुन रही थी, तो उन्हȗने बार-बार एक बात यह कही 
िक युवाओं क े िलए क ु छ नहीं िकया गया, रोजगार क े िलए क ु छ नहीं िकया गया, लगातार इस बा
त 
की चचार् हो रही थी।  मȅ इस बात पर तथ्यȗ क े माध्यम युवा बजट पर बात करना चाहूंगी।  मुझे 
कहने मȂ गुरेज नहीं िक यह युवा सम
िर्पत बजट है और मȅ फ ैक्ट क े माध्यम से बताना चाहूंगी। आज 
भारत िवÌव का तीसर ा सबसे बड़ा Îटाटर्-अप ईको िसÎटम बन चुका है।  इसका Ǜेय हमारे युवा 
उǏिमयȗ को ही जाता है।  Îटाटर्-अप इंिडया और िÎकल इंिडया कायर्कर्मȗ ने लाखȗ युवाओं को 
कौशल Ģिशक्षण Ģदान कर उन्हȂ नए रोजगार और उǏिमता  क े िलए तैयार िकया है। आज देश मȂ 
1.3 लाख Îट
ाटर्-अÃस पंजीकृ त हो चुक े हȅ, िजनमȂ से 115 से अिधक यूिनकॉनर् शािमल हȅ। इस बजट 
मȂ Îटाटर्-अप इंिडया क े िलये लोन की जो सीमा थी, वह 10 करोड़ से बढ़ाकर 20 करोड़ तक कर 
दी गई है और गारंटी की फीस भी कम कर दी गई है।  
महोदय, 1 करोड़ युवा पीढ़ी क े िलए  Internshi
p योजना तैयार की गई है। िडिजटल कर्ांित 
से इस युग मȂ भारत िवÌव की सबसे तेजी से बढ़ती हुई िडिज टल अथर्ËयवÎथाओं मȂ से एक बन 
चुका है। महोदय, भारत 5 जी, Artificial Intelligence, Cl oud Computing, Blockchain जैसी 
तकनीकȗ मȂ एक अगर्णी भूिमका िनभा रहा है।  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
61

 
महोदय, उत्पादन आधािरत Ģोत्साहन योजनाओं क े माध्यम से 8 लाख नये रोजगारȗ का 
सृजन हुआ है, िनमार्ण क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी 20 लाख नये रोजगारȗ का सृजन हुआ है। बुिनयादी ढांचे क े 
िवकास मȂ िनवेश क े कारण यह संभव हुआ है।  
महोदय, एमएसएमई सेक्टर क े िलए 25 हज़ार करोड़ का जो Technology Upgradation 
Fund  तै यार िकया गया है, इससे हमारे गर्ा
मीण क्षेतर् क े जो युवा हȅ, उन्हȂ रोजगार क े नए अवसर 
िमलȂगे। महोदय, इन्फॉमर्ल सेक्टर मȂ काम करने वा ल े 6 करोड़ मजदूरȗ को ई-Ǜम पोटर्ल से जोड़ा 
गया है, Îटेम िशक्षा को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 1500 Îकू लȗ मȂ Robotics और Artificial Intelligence 
लैÅस की Îथापना की गई है।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, भारत मȂ पहली बार 50 हज़ार  िवदेशी छातर्ȗ ने भा रतीय  
िवÌविवǏालयȗ मȂ Ģवेश िलया है। यह हमारे देश की उच्च  िशक्षा तंतर् की बढ़ती वैिÌवक ĢितÍठा 
को दशार्ता है। महोदय, सबसे बड़ी बात, जो मȅ यहाँ पर बताना चाहती हूं, वह यह है िक मेरे 
हज़बȅड भी इन्कम टैक्स िव भाग मȂ एिडशनल किमÌनर हȅ। पहले हमारे पास बायो डेटा आते थे िक 
मैडम, नौकरी क े िलए थोड़ा Ģयास कीिजए, यह कीिजए, वह कीिजए। महोदय, हमारे पास ऐसे 
बहुत बायो डेटाज आते थे। उनके  पास दो ही काम होते थे, वे लोग या तो एडिमशन क े िलए Ģयास 
करते थे या नौकरी क े िलए, लेिकन आजकल मȅने जो बदलाव देखा है, उसमȂ मȅ यह देख रही हूं 
िक जो भी यूथ आ रहा है, वह यह नहीं कहता िक नौकरी चािहए, बिÊक यह कहता है िक मैडम, 
क ु छ काम कर
ना चाहते हȅ, क्या आपकी तरफ से इसमȂ क ु छ मदद हो सकती है? महोदय, सोच 
का यह जो बदलाव आया है, यह 2014 क े बाद माननीय मोदी जी क े Ģयासȗ से आया है और 
इसकी कोई कीमत नहीं है।  
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ देश क े अन्नदाता क े बारे मȂ भी क ु छ बात करना चाहूंगी। महोदय, 
िकसान हमारे अन्नदाता हȅ और मȅ आप
को बताना चाहूंगी यिद कहीं पर भी कोई बैठक हुई है, पाटीर् 
या संगठन की भी कोई बैठक हुई है, हम सांसदȗ, माननीय मंितर्यȗ की बैठक हुई है, तो कभी भी 
ऐसा नहीं हुआ है िक हमारे िकसान भा
इयȗ की चचार् न हुई हो, हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने उनक ी चचार् 
न की हो। महोदय, इस बजट मȂ भी उनकी चचार् हुई है और मȅ अपने क ु छ फ ैक्ट्स क े माध्यम से 
उनके  बारे मȂ बताना चाहूंगी। आकांक्षी िजलȗ की अभूतपूवर् सफलता क े बाद ‘Ģधान मंतर्ी धन-धान्य 
क ृिष योजना’ सौ िजलȗ मȂ शुरू  की गई है। दल
हन पर आत्मिनभर्रता क े िलए ‘राÍटर्ीय खाǏ तेल-
ितलहन िमशन’ को कायार्िन्वत िकया जा रहा है। महोदय, कपास उत्पादन मȂ 5 वषर् क े िलए नये 
िमशन का आयोजन िकया गया है। आज हमारी सरकार तूहर, उड़द, मसूर पर िमशन क े साथ 6 
वषीर्य दलहन आत्मिनभर्र कायर्कर्म का भी क
ायार्न्वयन कर रही है।  
महोदय, आधुिनक क ृिष मȂ तकनीक की भूिमका महत्वपूणर् होती जा रही है। सरकार ने 
क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ िडिजटल पिरवतर्न हेतु 1.5 लाख करोड़ का िनवेश िकया है। यह िनवेश िक सानȗ को 
उन्नत उपकरणȗ, सटीक क ृिष तकनीकȗ और िडिजटल Ãलेटफॉमș  क े माध्यम से बेहतर 
जानकारी उपलÅध कराने मȂ सहायक होगा।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, इसके  अलावा सरकार िकसानȗ को Soil Health Cards, फसल 
बीमा योजना, पीएम िकसान सÇमान िनिध आिद योजनाओं क े माध्यम से उनके  जीवन Îतर को 
ऊ ंचा उठाने का Ģयास कर रही है।  
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, चूंिक मȅ यूपी से आती हूं, इसिलए यूपी क े िलए इस बजट मȂ क्या 
है, उस पर बात करना चाहूंगी। महोदय, वहाँ पर डबल इंजन की सरकार चल रही है, इसिलए 
इसमȂ कोई कहने वाली बात नहीं है िक यूपी की हर जगह लगा तार चचार् हो रही है। महोदय, उǄर 
Ģदेश को क Ȃदर्ीय बजट से 1.5 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का आवंटन िमला है। यह रािश राज्य क े 
बुिनयादी ढांचे, ÎवाÎथ्य, िशक्षा ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: संगीता जी, अपना भाषण कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव: महोदय, यही संकट है। मȅ जैसे ही खड़ी होती हूं, वैसे ही समय खत्म हो 
जाता है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: संगीता जी, समय मेरे हाथ मȂ नहीं है। अभी बोलने क े िलए बहुत Îपीकसर् बचे हȅ।  
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव: ठीक है महोदय, मȅ अपनी बात समाÃत करती हूं। मȅ बस एक िमनट का 
टाइम ले रही हूं। 
 महोदय, ‘उड़ान योजना’ क े तहत यूपी क े 24 छोटे हवाई अƿȗ को राÍटर्ीय हवाई अƿȗ से 
जोड़ने का Ģावधान िकया गया है। महोदय, यूपी मȂ एआई िशक्ष ा क े िलए 500 करोड़  रुपय े की 
लागत से एक उत्कृ Íटता क Ȃ दर् Îथािपत िकया गया है,  जो ग्लोबल टैक्नोलॉजी क े हब क े रूप  मȂ 
िवकिसत होगा। ...(समय की घंटी)... बस, दो लाइनȂ  बोलकर अपनी बात समाÃत कर रही हूं।  
महोदय, महाकुं भ, बौǉ सिर्कट, राम मंिदर क े िलए भी इस बजट मȂ धनरािश का Ģाव
धान िकया 
गया है। मȅ सभी भाई बहनȗ से िनवेदन करूं गी िक मोदी जी और हम सभी का जो एक सपना है िक 
भारत 2047 तक िवकिसत देश बने, इस संबंध मȂ मȅ सभी से दो लाइनȂ बोलना चाहूंगी:  
 
वƪ कम है, िजतना दम है लगा दो 
               क ु छ लोगȗ को हम जगा रहे हȅ,  
                                                क ु छ लोगȗ को आप जगा दो। 
   
उपसभापित जी, मुझे अपनी बात  रखने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: संगीता यादव जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यव ाद।  मुजीबुÊला खान जी, आपके  
पास तीन िमनट हȅ, आप अपना भाषण आरंभ कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): सर, मȅ बजट क े ऊपर बोलना चाहता हूँ, लेिकन हमारे ओिडशा से 
मेरे साथी सांसद ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ बहुत क ु छ बोल चुक े हȅ। मȅ एक बात बहुत दुख क े साथ कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक हमारे बजट मȂ दो लोगȗ क े ऊपर ध्यान नहीं िदया गया है, वे हȅ हमारे देश क े िकसान 
और जवान। िकसान हम सब का पेट भरता है, हमारी भूख िमटात
ा है और जवान हमारी रक्षा 
करता है। इन दोनȗ क े िलए बजट मȂ क ु छ नहीं है। तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी, लालबहादुर शाÎतर्ी जी 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
63

 
ने "जय जवान जय िकसान" का नारा इसिलए नहीं िदया था िक िकसान, जो हमारे िलए पैदावार 
करता है, हमȂ खाने क े िलए अनाज देता है, वह छोटी सी एमएसपी क े िलए आज तक Îटर्ाइक पर 
बैठा हुआ है। यह समÎया सारे भारतवषर् मȂ हर जग ह पर है। उनकी बात क्यȗ नहीं सुनी जा रही है? 
उन्हȂ लेकर बजट मȂ क ु छ भी नहीं है। अगर Îवामीनाथन कमीशन की िरपोटर् को full fledged लागू 
िकया जाता, तो यह समÎया नहीं आती।  हमारे देश क े िकसान खुशहाली से रहते और हमȂ अनाज 
पैदा करके  देते।  यह एक सबसे बड़
ी समÎया है।  
दूसरी बात, हमारे जवान जो िसयािचन जैसे ठंडे क्षेतर् से लेकर गमर् रेिगÎतान तक, हर 
जगह हमारी रक्षा करते हȅ, उन जवानȗ की बात ठीक से सुनी नहीं जा रही है। इसी कारण, बहुत 
सी जगहȗ पर ऐसा होता है िक या तो जवान अपने आपको गोली मार लेता है या िफर सामने वाले 
को गोली मार देता है। बजट मȂ उनके  बारे मȂ भी को ई Ģावधान नहीं है और क ु छ कहा भी नहीं गया 
है।  
मȅ तीसरी बात रेलवे लाइन क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहता हूँ। हमारे ओिडशा मȂ मेरे िजले मȂ एक 
रेलवे लाइन आने वाली है - जूनागढ़ से नबरंगपुर। उस रेलवे लाइन क े िलए बजट मȂ एक रुपया भी 
नहीं रखा गय
ा है। कई सालȗ से सुनते आ रहे हȅ िक रेलवे लाइन शुरू  होगी, उस पर काम होगा। 
वह हमारा बैकवडर् िजला है, आिदवासी िजला है, उस िजले मȂ अभी तक रेलवे लाइन नहीं पहुंची 
है।  
सर, देश को Îवाध
ीन हुए 75 साल हो गए। बȅिंकग facilities का भी गांव मȂ कोई Ģावधान 
नहीं है। बहुत से लोगȗ को पȂशन पाने क े िलए बहुत दूर जाना पड़ता है। जो उĦदराज लोग हȅ, वे 
चल नहीं सकते हȅ, आगे नहीं बढ़ सक
ते हȅ, जा नहीं सकते हȅ, वे लोग बहुत ही समÎया से आगे 
बढ़ते हȅ। ओिडशा मȂ बहुत सी जगहȗ पर मोबाइल नेटवकर् भी ठीक नहीं है, िजस के  कारण 
आजकल पढ़ने क े िलए जो ऑनलाइन िसÎटम है, उसमȂ छोटे बच्चे मोबाइल नेटवकर् ढ ूंढ़ते-ढ ूंढ़ते 
कोई पहाड़ पर, तो कोई झाड़ पर चढ़ जाता है। इसे लेकर तत्कालीन मुख्य मंतर्ी, हमारे नेता, Ǜी 
नवीन पटनायक जी ने कई बार क Ȃ दर् सरकार से आगर्ह िकया है। यहाँ तक िक उनकी majority 
नहीं रहने क े बावजूद भी, हमने उन्
हȂ राज्य सभा एमपी की सीट दी थी, जो िक अभी मोबाइल 
नेटवकर् क े मंतर्ी भी हȅ और रेलवे मंतर्ी भी हȅ। ...(समय की घं
टी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: कन्क्लूड कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से आगर्ह करू ँगा िक हमारे ओिडशा की रेलवे 
कनेिक्टिवटी और मोबाइल कनेिक्टिवटी को ठीक से बहाल िकया जाए और Ģावधान िक
या जाए, 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।      
           
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी, Ǜी रामदास अठावले जी। अनुपिÎथत। डा. संगीता बलवन्त जी, 
आपके  पास दस िमनट हȅ।  
 
डा. संगीता बलवन्त (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे 2025-26 क े 
बजट पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
मȅ अपनी बात का Ģारंभ अपनी Îवरिचत पंिƪयȗ से करना चाहूंगी:  
 
 आधी आबादी ने बजट पेश िकया आधी आबादी का 
साथ िलया जवान और िकसान को 
आवाम देख रही है बजट मȂ  
                                    मुÎकु राते िखलिखलाते िंहदुÎतान को। 
 
माननीय उप सभापित  महोदय, आज सदन मȂ खड़े होकर अत्यंत Ģसन्नता और गवर् क े 
साथ मȅ माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ǎारा ĢÎतुत क Ȃदर्ीय बजट 2025-26 की 
भूिर-भूिर सराहना करती हूँ। यह बजट भारत का 78 वाँ बजट है। यह हमारी मोदी सरकार का 
12वाँ बजट है और िवǄ मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ माननीय मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने इसे 
लगातार आठव
ीं बार ĢÎतुत िकया है। महोदय, भारत का 50.65 लाख करोड़ का यह बजट क ेवल 
एक िवǄीय दÎतावेज नहीं है, बिÊक यह हमारी सर कार की नारी सशिƪकरण, आत्मिनभर्र युवा, 
खुशहाल िकसान और राÍटर् क े समगर् िवकास क े Ģित अटू ट Ģितबǉता का Ģमाण है।  माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े क ुशल नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार ने हमेशा मिहलाओं को भ ारत 
की िवकास यातर्ा का क Ȃ दर् िंबदु बनाया है।   यह बजट इस िवÌवास को और मजबूत करता है िक 
नारी का उǉार Îविर्णम युग का ǎार है।  इस बजट मȂ कई कर्ांितकारी योजनाएं शािमल की गई हȅ, 
जो मिहला उǏिमता को बढ़ावा दȂगी, ÎवाÎथ्य और िशक्षा तक मिहलाओं की पहुंच सुिनिÌचत 
करȂगी और उन्हȂ आिर्थक रूप  से आत्मिनभर्र बनाएंगी।   
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय जी, मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूं िक सच्ची Ģगित की नींव  
आिर्थक सशिƪकरण है।  इस बजट मȂ पहली बा र उǏम शुरू  करने वाली मिहलाओं को सशƪ 
बनाने क े िलए अगले पांच वषș मȂ दो करोड़ रुपए  तक क े टमर् लोन की एक नई योजना शुरू  की 
गई है।  एक मिहला होने क े नाते मȅ यह कह सकती हूं िक जल की उपलÅधता मिहलाओं क े िलए 
सÇमान और सुरक्षा है।  हमारी सरकार ने ‘ जल जीवन िमश
न’ क े तहत पहले ही 15 करोड़ से 
अिधक गर्ामीण पिरवारȗ को नल कनेक्शन Ģदान िकया है, िजससे मिहलाओं पर पानी लाने का 
बोझ कम हुआ है।  यह बजट इस योजना को 2028 तक िवÎ तािरत करता है।  मोदी सरकार ऐसी 
अनिगनत एवं िविवध योजनाओं और देश िहत हेतु िलए गए िनणर्यȗ क े कारण जनता मȂ लोकिĢय 
है।  सरकार देश और जनता क े बारे मȂ क्या सोचती है और जनत ा सरकार क े बारे मȂ क्या सोचती 
है, इसको मȅ अपनी पंिƪयȗ मȂ कहूंगी: 
 
 शीषर् कदम हो, देश Ģथम हो, सबका हो उǉार, 
देवतुÊय जनता हरदम चाहे मोदी सरकार। 
 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय जी, बजट हमारे सरकार की समावेशी िव कास, मिहला 
नेतृत्व वाले िवकास और भारत क े उत्थान क े Ģित अिडग Ģितबǉता का Ģितिंबब है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी 
Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और िवǄ मंतर्ी Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी क े गितशील नेतृत्व मȂ हम िसफर् 
मिहला सशिƪकरण की चचार् नहीं कर रहे हȅ, बिÊक इसे वाÎ तिवकता मȂ बदल रहे हȅ।  ‘आयुÍमान 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
65

 
भारत Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना’ का बजट 3,624.80 करोड़ से बढ़ाकर 4,482.90 करोड़ 
कर िदया गया है, िजससे लाखȗ मिहलाओं को बेहतर ÎवाÎथ्य सुिवधाएं िमलȂगी।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय जी, ‘ Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना’ मिहलाओं को घर क े 
Îवािमत्व मȂ Ģाथिमकता देती है।  यह पहल इस बजट मȂ भी ज ारी है, जो मिहलाओं की आिर्थक 
सुरक्षा और पािरवािरक िनणर्य लेने की शिƪ को मजबूत करती है। ‘ Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना-
शहरी 2.0’ का बजट 1,500 करोड़ से 3,500 करोड़  कर िदया गया है। ‘ Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास 
योजना-गर्ामीण’ का बजट 32,500 करोड़ से 54,832 करोड़ कर िदया गय ा है।  िकसान कर् ेिडट 
काडș से 7.7 करोड़  िकसानȗ, मछु आरȗ और डेयरी िकसानȗ को अÊपकािलक ऋणȗ की सुिवधा 
िमलती है।  िकसानȗ क े कर् ेिडट काडर् की िलिमट को अब 3 लाख रुपय े से बढ़ाकर 5 लाख रुपय े 
कर िदया गया है।   िक सानȗ  क े िलए ‘ Ģधानमंतर्ी धन्य-धान्य क ृिष योजना’ चलाई जाएगी। इस 
योजना से देश क े करीब 1.7 करोड़ िकसानȗ को मदद िमलेगी।  इसके  तहत 100 ऐसे िजलȗ को 
कवर िकया जाएगा, जहां उत्पादन कम है। तुअर, उड़द, मसूर आिद दालȗ क े िलए 6 साल का 
Îपेशल िमशन चलाया जा
एगा।  हमारी सरकार ने टैक्स की सीमा 7 लाख रुपय े वािर्षक से बढ़ाकर 
12 लाख रुपय े वािर्षक कर दी  है। यह अभूतपूवर् एवं ऐितहािसक कदम है।  सरकार का मकसद 
िमिडल क्लास पिरवारȗ क े खचर् करने की क्षमता को बढ़ाना है। जब हर माह एक लाख कमाने वाले 
Ëयिƪ से सरकार को
ई इनकम टैक्स नहीं लेगी, तो उस Ëयिƪ क े पास ज्यादा पैसा बचेगा और जब 
उसके  पास ज्यादा पैसा होगा, तो वह खचर् भी ज्यादा करेगा। इससे िमिडल क्लास पि रवारȗ क े 
खचर् करने की क्षमता बढ़ेगी और इससे देश की नई अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ एक तेजी िदखाई देगी। 
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, िकराए से होने वाली आय पर टीडीएस की सीमा 2,40,000 
रुपए  से बढ़ा कर 6,00,000 रुपए  कर दी गई है। अब िकराए से होने वाली 6 लाख की आम दनी पर 
कोई टैक्स नहीं देना होगा। विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को Åयाज से होने वाली आय पर दोगुनी छू ट िमलेगी। 
छू ट को 50 हजार से बढ़ा कर 1 लाख कर िदया गया है। िवकिसत भारत क े युग मȂ युवा ही हमको 
लेकर जाएँगे, इसिलए हमारी सरकार ने सबसे ज्यादा ऐलान युवाओं को लेकर िकया है। जब तक 
युवा तैयार नहीं हȗगे, तब तक भारत कभी िवक
िसत नहीं बन पाएगा, सुपर पावर नहीं बन पाएगा।  
Îटाटर्अप को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए सरकार ने 10 हजार  करोड़ रुपए  का नया फ ं ड जारी िकया है, 
िजससे नौकिरयȗ क े नए अवसर खुलȂगे। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, िजज्ञासा, नवाचार और 
युवा मि
ÎतÍकȗ मȂ वैज्ञािनक सोच को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए आगामी 5 वषș मȂ सरकारी Îकू लो मȂ 50 
हजार Atal
 Tinkering Labs की Îथापना की जाएगी। 23 आईआईटीज़ मȂ िवǏािर्थयȗ की क ु ल 
संख्या मȂ 100 Ģितशत की वृिǉ हुई है, जो िवगत 10 वषș मȂ 65,000 से बढ़ कर 1.35 लाख हो गई 
है। वषर् 2014 क े पÌचाÞ शुरू  की गई 5 आईआईटीज़ मȂ अितिरƪ अवसंरच ना का सृजन िकया 
जाएगा, तािक 6,500 िवǏािर्थयȗ क े िलए िशक्षा को सुिवधाजनक बनाया जा सके । मोदी सरकार 
की, एनडीए सरकार की ऐसी तमाम योजनाओं को देखते हुए मेरी कलम ने िलखा: 
 
    सबका साथ सबका िवकास की तÎवीर खीं च दी, 
          िवकिसत भारत की तकदीर खींच दी, 
              िवरासत वाले देखते रह गए, 
       एक चाय वाले ने बड़ी लकीर खींच दी। 
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यह आम बजट बेहद खास बजट है, नए कीिर्तमान Îथािपत 
करने वाला बजट है। मȅ पुन: इसकी भूिर-भूिर  Ģशंसा करती हूँ। अंतत: दो पंिƪयȗ क े साथ मȅ 
अपनी वाणी को िवराम दूँगी।  मȅ मोदी सरकार की नीितयȗ और उपलिÅधयȗ को देखते हुए कहना 
चाहूँगी: 
िवपिक्षयȗ का िंसहासन िहल गया, 
चहुँ ओर कम
ल ही कमल िखल गया। 
मोदी की ऐसी लाजवाब नीितयाँ, 
िकसी का ट ूटा घमंड, िकसी को ज़ीरो िमल गया। 
 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद।  माननीय Ǜी रामज ी।  आपके  पास 5 िमनट हȅ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी (उǄर Ģदेश): मान्यवर, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे बजट 2025-26 की चचार् पर 
बोलने का अवसर िदया।  साथ ही, मȅ अपनी पाटीर् की मुिखया, आदरणीया बहन क ुमारी मायावती 
जी का भी आभार Ëयƪ कर
ता  हूँ।   
 मान्यवर, देश मȂ इस बजट से लगभग 70 परस Ȃट लोगȗ को िनराशा ही हाथ लगी।  बजट 
का देश की जनता बेसĤी से इंतजार करती है िक बजट क े बाद फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर्ी गरीब जनता 
को तमाम तरीके  की िरयायतȂ देने वाली होगी।  टीवी, िģज, खाने वाले सामान, आवÌयक वÎतुएँ, 
दाल, आटा, चावल, दूध, दही, बच्चȗ की िकताबȂ, पȂिसल, पेन, कपड़ा, खाद, पेिÎटसाइड, बीज, 
ये सारी चीजȂ सÎती हȗगी, पेटर्ोल सÎ
ता होगा।  लेिकन जÊदी ही उनको िनराशा हाथ लगी, जब 
माननीया फाइनȂस िमिनÎ टर जी गरीबȗ क े िलए इस तरह की कोई भी िरयायत नहीं ला पाईं। 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव) पीठासीन हुईं ।] 
 
 महोदया, देश मȂ लगभग 70 करोड़ लोग अलग-अलग सेक्टसर् मȂ मजदूरी करते हȅ।  इनकी 
मजदूरी 200 रुपए  से लेकर 300 रुपए  तक होती है और 300 रुपए  मȂ एक गरीब Ëयिƪ क्या 
करेगा! इस देश मȂ लंबे अरसे तक कांगर्ेस ने भी राज िकया और बीजेपी राज कर रही है। इन लोगȗ 
ने कहा िक हम गरीबी खत्म करȂगे, लेिकन आज तक िकसी भी सरकार ने गरीबी खत्म नहीं की।  
उनको 300 रुपए  आज भी िमलते हȅ। 15 साल पहले भी मजदूर को 300 रुपए िमल रहे थे और आज 
भी मजदूर को 300 रुपए िमलते हȅ, लेिकन महँगाई आसमान पर जाती है। मान्यवर, 2011  क े 
Socio Economic and Caste Census क े अनुसार, 56 परस Ȃट गर्ामीण गरीब पिरवारȗ क े पास 
खेती क े िलए कोई जमीन उपलÅध नहीं है। वे लोग िसफर् खेितहर मजदूर बन कर अपना 
जीवनयापन करते हȅ। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से कहना चाहूंगा िक सरकार क े पास लगभग 
40 लाख हेक्टेयर खेती योग्य जमीन खाली पड़ी है। अगर सरकार ग
रीबȗ और भूिमहीनȗ को इसमȂ 
से दो-दो एकड़ जमीन दे देती है, तो भारत क े कम से कम एक करोड़ पिरवार, जो भूिमहीन लोग 
हȅ, वे लोग अपने पैरȗ पर खड़े हो सक
ते हȅ। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से ये मांग करता हूं। 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
67

 
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से ये कहना चाहता हूं िक Îकू लȗ मȂ जो िमड-डे-मील िदया 
जाता है, उसमȂ बच्चȗ को पौिÍटक आहार नहीं िमलता।  सरकार उस फ ं ड को भी बढ़ाने का काम 
करे। साथ ही, Ģाइवेट Îकू लȗ की फीस और िकताबȗ की price hike हो रही है। वहाँ जो बच्चȗ की 
फीस बढ़ाई जा रही है, उसके  िलए कोई रेगुलेटर
ी बॉडी नहीं है। इस पर भी माननीया फाइनȂस 
िमिनÎटर ǎारा ध्यान देने की जरूरत  है। इसके  साथ ही मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से यह भी 
कहना चाहता हूं िक SC/ST का जो फ ं ड होता है, वह फ ं ड उन
की डेवलपमȂट पर, उनकी िशक्षा 
पर, उनके  रोजगार पर खचर् होना है, लेिकन तमाम सरकारȂ उस SC/ST fund को divert करके  
अन्य मदȗ मȂ खचर् करती है।  इस पर माननीया फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर रोक लगाएं, तािक जो फ ं ड िजस 
मद मȂ खचर् होना है, उसी मद मȂ वह खचर् िकया जाए। साथ ही, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह भी कहना 
चाहता हूं िक लंबे अरसे तक, काफी िदनȗ से, SC/ST क े बच्चȗ को scholarship टाइम पर नहीं 
िमल रही है तथा सरकारी Îकू लȗ क े fee structure की वजह से SC/ST क े जो तमाम गरीब बच्चे 
हȅ, वे एडिमशन नहीं ले पा रहे हȅ। अभी कई जग
हȗ पर ऐसा देखने को िमला है। आईआईटी मȂ 
देखने को िमला है िक गरीब बच्चे वहाँ पर एडिमशन लेने मȂ असमथर् रहे। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
सरकार से कहना चाहता हूं िक SC/
ST क े गरीब लोगȗ क े जो बच्चे हȅ, उनकी फीस को ģी िकया 
जाए और साथ ही उनका जो scholarship होता है, वह भी सरकार टा इम पर उनको देने का काम 
करे। 
महोदय, इसके  साथ ही मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह कहना चाहता हूं िक बाबा साहेब डा. 
अÇबेडकर ने इस देश क े अंदर रोजगार क े िलए और इस देश को आिर्थक शिƪ बनाने क े िलए 
तमाम दÎतावेज िलखे, तमाम तरह क े िरसचर् भी िदए और तमाम तरह की िकताबȂ भी िलख
ीं।  बाबा 
साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर ने अपने Volume No.3 मȂ यह िलखा है िक देश क े अंदर जो क ृिष क्षेतर् है, 
वह सरकार क े अधीन रहना चा
िहए। उन्हȗने उसके  साथ ही यह भी कहा िक बीमा क्षेतर् भी 
राÍटर्ीयकृ त होना चािहए। अगर आप बीमा क्षेतर् का 100 परसȂट Ģाइवेटाइजेशन कर दȂगे, तो इस 
देश को एक बहुत बड़ा जोिखम उठाना पड़ेगा, देश जोिखम की तरफ बढ़ सकता है। इसिलए मȅ 
माननीया फाइनȂस िमिनÎ
टर से कहूंगा िक वे इस पर भी पुनिर्वचार करȂ और बाबा साहेब की इस 
बात को भी ध्यान मȂ रखȂ। 
महोदय, सरकारी कमर्चारी लंबे अरसे से यह मांग करते चले आ रहे हȅ िक OPS लागू 
िकया जा
ए, लेिकन उनको OPS नहीं िमल रहा है। उनके  िलए NPS लाया गया, उसके  बाद UPS 
लाया गया, लेिकन सभी लोग इसको िरजेक्ट कर रहे हȅ। तो मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से कहना 
चाहता हूं िक OPS को पुन: लागू िकया जाए, उस पर क ंिसडर िकया जाए।  
महोदय, मȅ भारत का एक नागिरक होने क े नाते कहना चाहता हूं िक देश मȂ अलग-अलग 
Ģदेशȗ की सरकारȂ हज
ारȗ करोड़ रुपय े, जो िक टैक्स का पैसा होता है, उसे वे Ģचार मȂ खचर् 
करती हȅ। कहीं टीवी पर खचर् हो रहा है, कहीं hoarding पर खचर् हो रहा है, कहीं अखबारȗ मȂ खचर् 
िकया जा रहा है। अपने Ģचार-Ģसार क े िलए टैक्स का पैसा खचर् िकया जा रहा है। उस पर रोक 
लगाई जाए ...(समय की घं
टी)... और उस पैसे को इस देश क े अंदर िशक्षा पर, गरीब बच्चȗ की 
पढ़ाई क े ऊपर लगाया जाए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, please conclude करȂ। 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Ǜी रामजी: यह last point है।  यह बहुत important point है। 
महोदया, मȅ लाÎट मȂ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक Aviation Sector क े अंदर एक तरह से £ 
मची हुई है। मȅ सरकार से कहना चाहता हूं िक Aviation Sector क े अंदर उस £ को रोकने क े 
िलए, िजस तरह Telecom sector अंदर TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of India) 
बनाया गया है ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, अन्य सदÎय भी बोलने वाले हȅ।  इसिलए 
अब Ãलीज़ समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी: वैसे ही Aviation Sector क े अंदर भी एक TRAI जैसी regulatory body बनाई जाए, 
जो price hike को रोकने का काम करे, धन्यव ाद।  जय भीम, जय भारत!   
          
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार जी। 
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने आज मुझे बोलने की 
जो अनुमित दी है, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
महोदया, हमारे देश की  माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ǎारा ĢÎतुत बजट हमारे सÇमाननीय 
नेता, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय Ǜी मोदी जी क े ' िव
किसत भारत' क े दृिÍटकोण को 
रेखांिकत करता है। मȅ आज यहां 2025-2026 क े दूरदशीर् क Ȃदर्ीय बजट क े Ģित गह री Ģसन्नता 
Ëयƪ करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। यह बजट पूरे देश की आशाओं को लेकर आया है और यह उन 
अपेक्षाओं पर पूरी तरह खरा उतरा है। यह ÎपÍट रूप  से 2047 तक 'िवकिस त भारत' क े दृिÍटकोण 
को ĢाÃत करने क े Ģित सरकार की अटल Ģितबǉता को दशार्ता है।  
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार ǎारा लाया गया 2025-26 का बजट देश क े 
िवकास की मजबूत आधारिशला रखने वाला बजट है।   
माननीय महोदया, यह बजट गरीब लोगȗ, मध्यम वगर् क े लोगȗ, िकसानȗ सिहत आकांक्षी 
समाज क े सप
नȗ को पूरा करेगा।  यह बजट एक Îथाई भिवÍय क े िलए है, जो हिरत ऊजार्, हिरत 
िवकास, हिरत बुिनयादी ढांचे और युवाओं क े िलए रोजगार को और Ģोत्सािहत करेगा। मुझे 
िवÌव
ास है िक सवर्समावेशी और दूरदशीर् बजट हर वगर् को साथ लेकर चलने वाली है और यह 
एनडीए सरकार की आत्मिनभर्र भारत क े संकÊप को दृढ़ िनिÌचत करता है। बजट मȂ क ृिष को 
िवकास का Ģमुख घटक मानते हुए उस पर िवशेष जोर िदया गया है। मȅ उǄर Ģदेश क े 
शाहजहाँपुर से आता हूँ, जहाँ हमारी पोवायन तहसील मȂ धान, गेहूं, गन्ना, आलू  मुख्य उत्पाद हȅ।  
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
69

 
वहाँ क े िकसानȗ से मेरी बात हुई, वे बहुत खुश हȅ।  उत्पादकता बढ़ाने क े िलए फसल िविवधीकरण 
को बढ़ावा देने, िंसचाई तथा भंडारण अवसंरचना मȂ सुधार क े िलए सरकार ने 'Ģधान मंतर्ी धन-
धान्य क ृिष योजना' की शुरुआत  की है। इसी क े अंतगर्त जो सोलर पंप है, उससे िकसानȗ को 
िवशेष राहत, माननीय मुख्य मंतर्ी योगी जी क े ǎारा, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎ
ारा दी गई है।  
इसके  अितिरƪ दालȗ मȂ आत्मिनभर्रता क े िलए 6 वषर् का आत्मिनभर्र िमशन भी घोिषत िकया गय ा 
है। बजट मȂ उच्च उत्पादकता वाले बीजȗ क े िलए राÍटर्ीय िमशन, कपास उत्पादन बढ़ाने क े िलए 
िवशेष िमशन और सिÅजयȗ व फलȗ क े िलए एक िवशेष कायर्कर्म जैसे कदमȗ का भी उÊलेख िकया 
गया है। ये सभी पहल क ृिष क्षेतर् को मजबूत करने क े िलए और दीघर्कािलक िÎथरता सुिनिÌचत 
करने क े Ģित सरकार की Ģितबǉता को दशार्ती है। इसके  अितिरƪ मछ
ली पालन क्षेतर् क े िलए 
2025-26 क े बजट मȂ क ु ल 2, 703.67 करोड़ रुपए  का आवंटन िकया गया है। बजट मȂ भारत क े 
िवशेष आिर्थक क्षेतर्, Exclusive Economic Zone और हाई सीज मȂ मछली संÎथानȗ क े सतत 
उपयोग क े िलए सक्षम ढांचा Îथािपत करने की योजना ĢÎतुत की गई है, िजसमȂ िव श ेष रूप  से 
अंडमान और िनकोबार ǎीपȗ पर ध्यान क Ȃिदर्त िकया गया है।   
माननीय महोदया, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िवǄ मंतर्ी जी से िनवेदन भी करू ँगा िक लक्षǎीप मȂ 
िजन बोट्स से मछली उत्पादक मछली पकड़ने जाते हȅ, वहाँ पर उन बोट्स मȂ Ģयोग होने वाले 
क ेरोिसन कई सालȗ से बंद कर िदया गया है। िजसकी वजह से उन
की बोट्स खड़ी रहती हȅ।  
इसको ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए सरकार से िनवेदन है िक वह वहां पर क ेरोिसन उपलÅध कराने का काम 
करे। इस पहल क े तहत ' Ģधान मंतर्ी मत्Îय सÇपदा योजना' क े बजट आवंटन मȂ 2024-25 क े 
संशोिधत अनुमान की तुलना मȂ 2025-26 क े िलए 64 Ģितशत की अिधक महत्वपूणर् वृिǉ की गई 
है। 
माननीय मह
ोदया, इस बजट की सबसे बड़ी उपलिÅधयȗ मȂ से एक वेतन भोगी वगर् को 
आयकर मȂ राहत Ģदान करना है। इस कदम क े तहत एक लाख रुपए  Ģित माह तक की आय 
अिर्जत करने वाले Ëयिƪयȗ को कर मȂ छू ट दी गई है, जबिक अन्य करदाताओं क े कर भार मȂ भी 
कमी की गई है। माननीय महोदया, इस पहल से उपभोग और िनवेश का एक सकारात्
मक चकर् 
Ģारंभ होने की उÇमीद है, िजससे भारत की आिर्थक वृिǉ को पुनजीर्िवत िकया जा सकता है। वषर् 
2025 मȂ इसे 6.4 परसȂट और िवǄ वषर् 2025-26 मȂ 6.3 परसȂट से 6.8 क े बीच रहने का अनुमान है। 
...(समय की घं
टी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया आप कन्क्लूड करȂ।  
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: माननीय महोदया, मुझे 10 िमनट का समय िदया गया था। मȅने इसकी कई 
िदनȗ से तैयारी की है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): अभी तो आपका समय 5 िमनट ही था। 
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: मान
नीय महोदया, मेरा यह अनुरोध है िक इसको थोड़ा बढ़ा दीिजए। 
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
माननीय महोदया, इसमȂ सूÑम, लघु और मध्यम एमएसएमई क्षेतर् को मजबूत करने क े िलए 
कई उपायȗ की घोषणा की गई है। Ëयवसायȗ क े िवÎतार और दक्षता मȂ सुधार क े िलए एमएसएमई 
वगीर्करण की िनवेश और टनर्ओवर सीमा को बढ़ा िदया गया है। राÍटर्ीय िविनमार्ण िमशन की 
शुरुआत  की गई है, िजसका उǈेÌय Ë
यापार बढ़ाने मȂ आसानी है। 'Ģधान मंतर्ी िवÌवकमार् योजना' 
क े तहत गरीबȗ, िकसानȗ, हमारे देहात क्षेतर् क े अनुसूिचत जाित क े लोगȗ को काफी फायदा िमलने 
वाला है। महोदया, िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने बजट मȂ एससी-एसटी मिहला उǏिमयȗ क े िलए एक नई 
योजना शुरू  करने की घोषणा की है। ...(समय की घं
टी)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, आप Ãलीज़ conclude करȂ। 
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: महोदया, यह बहुत इंपोटȄट है। मȅ एससी समाज से आता हूँ, तो मुझे एक 
मौका दे दीिजए।  मȅ तो सोच रहा था िक मȅ 10 िमनट बोलूंगा। एससी समाज पूरे देश मȂ िबखरा पड़ा 
था, कोई पूछने वाला नहीं था, लेिकन जब से देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय मोदी जी बने हȅ, तब से 
एससीज़ को लगा है िक हमारी भी कोई सरकार है। 
महोदया, अगले पाच वषș मȂ दो करोड़ तक का जो टमर् लोन होगा, उसके  दायरे मȂ 5 लाख 
मिहलाएं, अनुसूिचत जाित और अनुसूिचत जन
जाित वगर् क े लोग आएंगे। मȅ आपको एक पुरानी 
बात याद िदलाना चाहता हूँ। जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार हुआ करती थी, तब अनसूिचत जाित क े 
लोगȗ को अफवाह फ ैलाकर ये गुमराह करते थे िक हम तुÇहȂ 50 परसȂट छू ट दे रहे हȅ, 50 परसȂट 
छू ट दे रहे हȅ, लेिकन छू ट मातर् 5,000 रुपय े की थी, िजसमȂ भȅस, बकरी पालन ही वे कर पाते थे।  
इस तरह, उनको ठगने का काम कांगर्ेस की सरकार करती थी। आज हमारे देश क े माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने एससी- एसटी मिह
लाओं को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए 2 करोड़ तक का लोन देने का 
काम िकया। 
महोदया, एक बात कहकर मȅ अपनी बात खत्म करूं गा। मȅने देश मȂ कई Îटेट्स मȂ ĥमण 
िकया।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् योजना, जो " आयुÍमान का
डर्" है, वह 
चलाई गई। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, आप Ãलीज़ conclude करȂ। 
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: महोदया, मुझे बस एक िमनट दे दीिजए। एक पिÌचमी बंगाल है, जहां 
आयुÍमान काडर् को लागू नहीं िकया गया है, नल से जल की योजना लागू नहीं की गई है। वहां 
कांगर्ेस की सेक ं ड पाटर् की पाटीर् है, जो कांगर्ेस से िनकलकर एक अलग पाटीर् बनी और उसने 
गरीबȗ का दम
न िकया। ऐसे ही, क ेरल मȂ भी नल से जल योजना का लाभ नहीं िदया गया। ...(समय 
का घंटी)...  
महोदया, अभी आपने देखा होगा िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने देश भर मȂ सफ ाई 
अिभयान चलाया, लेिकन िदÊली की सरकार मȂ सफाई नहीं हुई। मȅ िदÊली की जनता को बहुत 
साधुवाद देता हूँ, धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक सफाई क े नाम पर, आयुÍमान काडर् क े नाम पर उन्हȗने उन 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
71

 
लोगȗ को बाहर करने का काम िकया, जो जनता का खून चूसते थे, एक बोतल क े साथ एक बोतल 
ģी शराब िदया करते थे, लेिकन नािलयȗ की सफाई नहीं करते थे। 
 अंत मȂ, मȅ इतना ही कहूंगा िक हमारे देश की माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी, मान नीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी क े ǎारा जो यह लोक महत्व का बजट देश को िदया गया है, उसका मȅ Îवागत करता हूँ।  
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): अगले वƪा, Ǜी कािर्तके य शमार्; not pres ent. Ǜी बृज 
लाल जी।  
 
Ǜी बृज लाल (उǄर Ģदेश):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे बजट पर बात करने का मौका 
िदया है, उसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। 
 माननीय िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने बजट मȂ जो कहा है, उसमȂ Ģथम क ृिष है, दूसरा 
एमएसएमई है, तीसरा िनवेश है और चौथा एक्सपोटर् है। महो
दया, आपने मुझे बहुत कम समय 
िदया है।  मȅने अभी देखा िक मेरा 10 िमनट का समय था, जो पहले 6 िमनट हो गया और अब वह 5 
िमनट हो गया है। मȅ अनुरोध करूं गा िक मुझे थोड़ा और समय दे दीिजएगा।  Ģथम इंजन है - क ृिष।   
महोदया, क ृिष से 60 करोड़ लोग जुड़े हȅ। अगर इस
मȂ मजदूरȗ को भी जोड़ िलया जाए, तो 
उससे कहीं ज्यादा संख्या होती है। हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ क ृिष का एक बहुत बड़ा रोल है और 
इसीिलए क ृिष को रोजगार का सबसे बड़ा ǣोत माना जाता है। क ृिष हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा की रीढ़ 
है, िजसका हमारी जीडीपी मȂ 19 पर
सȂट का सहयोग होता है। कांगर्ेस क े समय मȂ क ृिष पर ध्या न 
नहीं िदया गया, उसे नेगलेक्ट िकया गया, लेिकन जब मोदी जी आए, तो 2018 मȂ "क ृिष सÇमान 
िनिध" योजना लागू हुई।  इन लोगȗ ने 60 वषș तक शासन िकया, लेिकन क ु छ क्यȗ नहीं िकया?  
महोदया, यह क ेवल 6,
000 रुपय े की बात नहीं है। इस 6,000 रुपय े से इस देश का दिलत, 
आिदवासी भूिमहीन होने से बच गया।  उसके  पास 5 िबÎवा जमीन थी, 10 िबÎवा जमीन है, लेिकन 
वह खेती नहीं कर पाता था, अगर वह कर पाता था तो क ेवल मज दूरी कर पाता था। लोग कहते थे 
िक तुम इस जमीन का क्या करेगा? अब उसको उस 5 िबÎवा जमीन पर 6,000 रुपय े िमलते हȅ, 
िजसको वह पैदा नहीं कर सकता था।  
महोदया, हमारे राज्य उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 2004 मȂ जब समाजवादी पाटीर् की सरकार आई, तो 
उसने एक िबल मूव िक
या और कहा िक दिलत की जमीन बेचने मȂ डीएम क े परिमशन की 
आवÌयकता नहीं होगी। उस परिमशन की जरूरत  क्यȗ थी? उस परिमशन की जरूरत  इसिलए 
थी, तािक दबंग लोग दिलतȗ, आिदवािसयȗ और िपछड़ȗ की जमीन खरीद न लȂ। उसके  बाद, 
उसका इतन
ा िवरोध हुआ िक वह िबल समाजवादी पाटीर् सरकार पास नहीं करा पाई, अदरवाइज़ 
आज वे सब भूिमहीन हो गए होते। यह जो 6,000 रुपय े की सहायता है, इस 6,000 रुपय े की 
सÇमान िनिध ने उनको भूिमहीन होने से बचा िलया। 
महोदया, इसके  बाद, क ृिष क े िलए यूिरया मȂ हम लोग आत्मिनभर्र हȅ। अभी नामरूप  मȂ एक 
यूिरया Ãलांट Îथािपत करने की घोषणा की गई है। हमारे Ģदेश क े गोरखपुर मȂ एक फ ैक्टर्ी थी, जो 
1968 मȂ लग
ी और 1990 मȂ बंद हो गई। उसको मोदी जी ने दोबारा शुरू  िकया और आज वह 
दोबारा उत्पादन कर कर रही है। इस तरह से क ृिष को तमाम सुिवधाएं दी गई। आज हमारा 
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
िकसान क ृिष क े क्षेतर् मȂ खुशहाल हुआ है। महोदया, मोदी जी क े Ģयास से 75th जनरल असेÇबली ने 
वषर् 2024 को  ‘ इंटरनेशनल ईयर ऑफ िमलेट’ घोिषत िकया। िमलेट वह फ ू ड है, िजसमȂ सांवा, 
कोदो, मडुआ, काकु न, ज्वार, बाजरा आिद गरीबȗ का खाना होता था, आज वह िमलेट सुपर फ ू ड 
हो गया है और सुपर फ ू ड को पैदा करने का काम सबसे ज्यादा एिरड एिरया मȂ होता है, जहां 
िंसचाई क े साधन नहीं है, कम हȅ, तो आज उनके  पास िमलेट जैसा सुपर फ ू ड है, माकȃ ट मȂ इसकी 
सबसे बड़ी कीमत है।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हम 38.4 परसȂट िमलेट पैदा करते हȅ, जो हम एक्सपोटर् कर रहे हȅ। 
अब कांगर्ेस क े बारे मȂ बताता हूं। वषर् 1954 मȂ कांगर्ेस PL480 लाई थी। वह लाल गेहूं था। महोदया, 
अभी हमारे दीपक Ģकाश जी कह रहे थे िक झारखंड मȂ गरीबी इतनी है िक लोग कटहल का बीज 
खाते हȅ। आप तो उसी क्षेतर् की रहने वाली हȅ। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक उǄर 
Ģदेश मȂ लोग गोबरैला अनाज खाते थे। जब बैल दवाई खा लेता था, िफर उसके  गोबर से जो 
साबुत अनाज िनकलता था, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ लोग उसको धोकर खाते थे, यह मȅने अपनी आंखȗ से 
देखा है। कांगर्ेस क े ज़माने मȂ गोबरैला अनाज, साखू क े बीज आिद तमाम चीज़Ȃ लोग खाते थे। 
महोदया, पीएल 480 वषर् 1969 तक जारी रहा। अमेिरका चƿी गाढ़ता था, वह कहता था िक तुमको 
अनाज नहीं दȂगे। 
 आज इतना अनाज पैदा हो रहा है िक हम 80 करोड़ लोगȗ को अनाज दे रहे हȅ, एक्सपोटर् 
भी कर रहे हȅ और दुिनया का पेट भरने की क्षमता हमारी है। महोदया, कांगर्ेस क े उस PL480 की 
एक सौगात अभी बाकी है और वह सौगात है - कांगर्ेस गर्ास - पाथȃिनयम, जो पूरे देश मȂ उगता है, 
उससे अÎथमा पैदा होता है, एलजीर् पैदा होती है। कांगर्ेस क े PL480 की सौगात आज भी बीमारी 
क े रूप  मȂ Ģिसǉ है। कांगर्ेस ने िकसानȗ क े साथ यह िकया।  
महोदया, दलहन गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ और हर क्षेतर् मȂ Ģोटीन का सबसे मुख्य साधन है, िजस पर 
ध्यान नहीं िदया गया। हमारा उǄर Ģदेश दलहन का सबसे बड़ा उत्पादक है। योगी जी की सरकार 
मȂ दलहन का उत्पादन 37 परसȂट बढ़ा है। मध्य Ģदेश मȂ भी बढ़ा है। ...(समय की घंटी)... महोदया, 
मȅ तीन िमनट का समय और लूंगा। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, Ãलीज़ conclude कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी बृजलाल: यह हाल है िक आज हमारा बुंदेलखंड सबसे ज्यादा – िजसे हम दाल का कटोरा 
कहȂगे, वहां िंसचाई क े साधन नहीं थे। माननीय अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने जब बेतवा और क े न 
नदी क े िंलक की शुरुआत  की, उसको मोदी जी ने पूरा िकया और आज बुंदेलखंड मȂ जब से 
िंसचाई की सुिवधा हुई है, आज वह धन-धान्य से भर गया है। वहां िडफȂ स कॉिरडोर भी है। एक 
समय तब था, जब समाजवादी पाटीर् की सरकार थी, वहीं आज हम दाल का Ģोडक्शन कर रहे हȅ, 
खाǏ मȂ आत्मिनभर्र हो रहे हȅ। वे लोग £ पैदा करते थे। चÇबल और पाठा जैसे क्षेतर् मȂ समाजवादी 
पाटीर् की सरकार इसिलए £ पालती थी, क्यȗिक वे तय करते थे िक िकसको वोट देना है। वे £ पैदा 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
73

 
करते थे और उन्हीं £ को पिरवारजनȗ को - एक बांदा का ...(समय की घंटी)... उस समय मȅ ही 
एडीजी लॉ एंड ऑडर्र था, वह मारा गया। महोदया, मȅ दो िमनट का समय लूंगा, ज्यादा नहीं लूंगा।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎय, Ãलीज़ 30 सेक ं ड मȂ conclude कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी बृजलाल: समाजवादी पाटीर् ने उसके  भाई को संसद सदÎय बनाया और भाई-भतीजȗ को 
एमएलए बनाया, तो मेरा कहना है िक उस समय की सरकारȂ £ पैदा करती थीं और हम िवकास की 
चीज़ȗ का Ģोडक्शन कर रहे हȅ। मȅ बहुत क ु छ बोलना चाहता   था, लेिकन िलिमटेड समय है। मȅ इस 
बजट का बहुत बड़ा Ģशंसक हूं। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को बधाई 
देता हूं। यह बजट वषर् 2047 क े पूणर् ‘ िवकिसत भारत’ का रोड मैप है। इसके  िलए बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): Ǜीमती महुआ माजी, आपके  पास 5 िमनट बोलने का समय 
है। 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी (झारखंड): महोदया, मुझे थोड़ा एक्Îटर्ा समय चािहए, क्यȗिक आपने इधर 
भी लोगȗ को समय िदया है। मȅ झारखंड का Ģितिनिधत्व कर रही हूं। 
माननीय उप
सभाध्यक्ष महोदया, माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ǎारा 
ĢÎतुत क Ȃदर्ीय बजट 2025-26 ने Ëयापक आलोचना को भी जन्म िदया है। क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े सबका 
साथ, सबका िवकास क े दावे क े बावजूद बजट भाजपा शािसत राज्यȗ का पक्ष लेता हुआ और 
झारखंड जैसे िवपक्ष शािसत राज्
यȗ मȂ योजनाओं और पिरयोजनाओं क े आवंटन मȂ भेदभाव करता 
हुआ साफ Ģतीत होता है।  झारखंड भारत मȂ सबसे समृǉ संसाधन युƪ राज्यȗ मȂ से एक हȅ, जो 
कोयला, आयरन-ओर और अन्य खिनजȗ क े िवशाल भंडार क े माध्यम से राÍटर्ीय  अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ 
महत्वपूणर् योगदान देता है।  इसके  बावजूद इस बजट मȂ राज्य की बड़े पैमाने पर अनदेखी की गई 
है। राज्य सरकार को क Ȃ दर् सरकार ǎारा कोयले की रॉयÊट ी क े 1,36,000 करोड़ रुपय े देने थे, तो 
हमारे माननीय मुख्य  मंतर्ी हेमन्त सोरेन जी  ǎारा बार-बार पतर् िलखने  क े बावजूद अभी तक वह 
पैसा नहीं िदया गया है और इस बजट मȂ भी उसका कोई उÊलेख भी नहीं िकया गया  है। जबिक 
उस  पैसे से हमारे  राज्य मȂ बहुत काम हो सकते हȅ। माननीय हेमन्त सोरेन जी का अपने समृǉ 
राज्य को देश का नंबर वन राज्य बनाने का का सपना है, वह भी पूरा हो सकता है। इसिलए मȅ 
िरक्वेÎट करती  हूं िक जÊद से  जÊद उस रािश का भुगतान कर िदया जाए। झारखंड मȂ धनबाद 
मȂ आप जानते हȗगे िक झ
िरया मȂ जमीन क े नीचे सालȗ से कोयले पर आग लगी हुई है, उसके  िलए 
मुझे लगता है िक िडजाÎटर मैनेजमȂट क े िलए भी एक बजट होन
ा चािहए। बरकƻा, झिरया, जहां 
देश का बहुमूÊय कोयला जलकर राख हो रहा है, पॉÊयुशन हो रहा है, लोग वहां  से माइगर्ेट कर 
रहे हȅ, इस पर ध्यान देने की जरूरत है।  यहां तक िक देश की राजधान
ी िदÊली है, तो पूरे देश मȂ  
िदÊली क े पॉÊयुशन की चचार् हो रही है, मुझे लगता है िक इसके  िलए भी अलग से िडजाÎटर 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
मैनेजमȂट बजट एलोके ट होना चािहए।  गरीब जनता का सहारा मȂ ड ू बे पैसȗ को वापस िदलाने मȂ 
क ेन्दर् सरकार झारखंड राज्य को िबÊकु ल मदद नहीं कर रही है। सहारा ने न जाने िकतने  गरीबȗ 
को बेसहारा कर िदया है। सहारा मȂ झारखंड क े लोगȗ क े लगभग 2,500 करोड़ रुपय े की रािश 
ड ूबने की आशंका है। ती
न लाख से ज्यादा छोटे-बड़े िनवेशकȗ का पैसा फ ं से होने का अनुमान है।  
धनबाद क े लगभग 1,872 लोगȗ ने राज्य सरकार से िशकायत की है और राज्य सरकार लगातार 
क ेन्दर्ीय रिजÎटर्ार को पतर् िलखकर पैसे वापस िदलाने की मांग कर रही है, लेिकन माननीय 
सुĢीम कोटर् क े िनदȃश क े बावजूद क ेन्दर् सरकार मौन है, इस पर ध्यान देने की जरूरत है।   
 सर, जल जीवन िमशन क े तहत िव
Ǆीय वषर् 2024-25 क े िलए झारखंड को 2 लाख, 11 
हजार, 422 करोड़ रुपय े आवंिटत िकए गए थे, लेिकन जनवरी, 2025 तक क ेन्दर् सरकार ǎारा 
क ेवल 29 हजार , 517 करोड़ रुपय े ही िदए गए हȅ यानी Îवीकृ त रािश का 14  Ģितशत ही जारी 
िकया गया है। हमारे राज्य मȂ कई ऐसे इलाके  हȅ, जहां जल की भयानक समÎया है, उसकी 
िकÊलत है, हाहाकार मचा हुआ है। झारखंड का एक िवधान सभा क्षेतर् गाण्डे है, जो िबहार से सटा 
हुआ है।  िपछले साल मई क े महीने मȂ वहां गई  थी, तो मȅने देखा िक गांव क े एक Ëयिƪ ने कहा िक 
उसने दस िदन से Îनान नहीं िकया था। वहां पर िजत
ने भी जल ǣोत हȅ, वे सभी सूख चुक े हȅ।  वहां 
नल, क ुं आ  कोई  भी काम नहीं कर रहा है। इसिलए जल-जीवन िमशन क े िलए जो Îवीकृ त रािश 
है, वह अिवलंब हमारे राज्य को दी जाए। एनसीआरबी का 2022 का डेटा देखȂ, तो भारत मȂ 
आत्महत्या  दर 12.4 Ģित एक लाख क े साथ दुिनया मȂ सबसे अिधक है और मानिसक िवकारȗ का 
इलाज ĢाÃत करने मȂ 83 Ģितशत की कमी है, जो िंचताजनक है। इसके  बावजूद मानिस
क ÎवाÎथ्य 
को पयार्Ãत िवǄीय समथर्न नहीं िमला। युवाओं और छातर्ȗ मȂ िडĢेशन  और आत्महत्या खत्म कर ने 
क े िलए  Ëयापक ÎवाÎथ्य नीित  और बड़े बजट की आवÌयकता है। झारखंड मȂ रांची िÎथत 
सीआईपी भारत का सबसे पुराना और ĢितिÍठत ÎवाÎथ्य संÎथानȗ मȂ से एक है, लेिकन इस वषर् क े 
बजट मȂ इसे पूरी तरह से नजरअंदाज िकया गया है। यह संÎथान अपने वातावरण और जलवायु 
पिरिÎथितयȗ की वजह से मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य देखभाल क े िलए आदशर् माना जाता है, िफर भी क ेन्दर् 
सरकार इसकी उपेक्षा कर रही है। आपको पता होगा िक तेजपुर िÎथत LGBRIMH को करोड़ȗ 
रुपय े आवंिटत िकए गए हȅ, वहीं  सीआईपी रांची की उपेक्षा की गई है। यह मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा 
संसाधनȗ क े असमान िव
तरण पर गंभीर सवाल खड़ा करता है और गैर भाजपा शािसत Ģदेशȗ क े 
साथ पक्षपात करने का एक उदाहरण  ĢÎतुत करता है। इस बार क े बजट मȂ ऐसा ĢÎतािवत है िक 
Ģधान मंतर्ी इंटनर्िशप योजना, 2024 क े तहत भारत सरकार देश की Ģमुख क ंपिनयȗ क े साथ 
िमलकर अग
ले पांच वषș मȂ एक करोड़ युवाओं को इंटनर्िशप Ģदान करेगी। इंटनर्िशप क े द ौरान 
युवाओं को  5,000 Ģितमाह का भǄा िमलने की बात कही गई है, िजसमȂ 4,500 रुपय े Ģितमाह 
सरकार देगी और 500 रुपय े  Ģितमाह क ंपनी अपनी तरफ से देगी। यहां इस बात की तर फ  ध्यान 
िदया जाना जरूरी  है िक 500 रुपय े Ģितमाह जो क ंपनी देगी, वह उनके  पूवर् िनधार्िरत सीएसआर 
से जाएगा, यानी इस तरह अगले पांच वषș मȂ अपने सीएसआर क े मद मȂ सीधे-सीधे 500 करोड़ 
रुपय े की कटौती कर दी जाएगी। …(समय  की घं टी)…  यह  योजना पहले से चल रहे कॉरपोरेट 
सोशल िरÎपाँिसिबिलटीज़ की कीमत पर भाजपा सरकार का अपना िवज्ञापन है।  इस तरह शेष 
4,500 रुपय े Ģितमाह िकस मद से देने वाली है,  यह भी ÎपÍट नहीं है।  यह बहुत संभव है िकसी 
पूवर् िनधार्िरत बजट का डायवजर्न है।  अत: इस Îतर पर सरकार को अपनी िÎथित ÎपÍट करनी 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
75

 
चािहए और इस योजना क े िलए अलग से बजट का Ģावधान िकया जाना चािहए। क्यȗिक िजस 
इलाके  मȂ क ंपिनयाँ काम करती हȅ, वहाँ क े पॉÊयुशन से िनपटने की िजÇमेदारी क ंपिनयाँ उठाती हȅ।  
project-affected area मȂ CSR fund  का इÎतेमाल art, culture, education, sports, women 
empowerment, गरीबी उन्मूलन, local infrastructure development जैसी महत्व पूणर् 
कÊयाणकारी योजनाओं क े िलए िकया जाता है, िजन्हȂ सरकार अपनी तरफ से internship मद मȂ 
से खचर् करने क े िलए बाध्य कर रही है। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎया, क ृपया कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: बस, दो िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत कर रही हूं। महोदया, कोई jo b 
guarantee नहीं है। जैसा िक मुझे मेरे सवाल क े उǄर मȂ माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने कहा था, ऐसे मȂ हो 
सकता है िक युवा बाद मȂ नौकरी क े िलए बाहर चले जाएं और Îथानीय लोगȗ को ...(सम य की 
घंटी)... िमलने वाले लाभ भी न िमलȂ। कहीं ऐसा न हो िक 6 महीने मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎया, क ृपया कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: महोदया, 6 महीने से साल भर तक टर्ेिंनग ĢाÃत युवा अि
 ग्नवीर से बहाल हुए 
युवाओं की तरह ठगा सा महसूस करȂ। महोदया, अिग्नवीर मȂ तो िफर भी तीन साल की नौकरी है। 
...(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती संगीता यादव): माननीय सदÎया, क ृपया कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: महोदया, मȅ बस दो पंिƪयाँ बोलकर अपनी बात खत्म कर रही हूं। िकसी ने 
ठीक ही कहा है िक: 
वादȗ की गठरी उठाए िफरते हȅ 
हक की बातȗ को दबाए िफरते हȅ। 
रोजगार क े नाम पर िमलती है तालीम 
और सपनȗ को बहलाए िफरते हȅ। 
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती सं
गीता यादव): धन्यवाद माननीय सदÎया। Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू, आप  
अपना भाषण आरंभ कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू (नाम िनदȃिशत): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
मैडम, मुझे इस सदन मȂ एक साल पूरा हो गया है। इस बजट सेशन मȂ मुझे दूसरी बार बोलने का 
समय िमला है। महोदया, मȅने 15 िमन
ट की तैयारी की थी, मुझे 10 िमनट का अंदाजा था, लेिकन 
पाँच िमनट ही िमले हȅ, सभ ी का समय कटा है। महोदया, शेरो शायरी का माहौल भी है, इसिलए मȅ 
एक शेर अपनी लीडरिशप क े धन्यवाद क े िलए बोलना चाहूंगा िक: 
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
हजारȗ ख्वािहशȂ ऐसी िक हर ख्वािहश पर दम िनकले, 
बहुत िनकले अरमा मेरे मगर िफर भी कम िनकले, कम िनकले। 
 
महोदया, मुझे बजट पर बोलने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ 
अब तक क े सबसे इंक्लूिस व बजट को ĢÎतुत करने क े िलए िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण 
जी और आदरणीय Ģधानमंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का धन्यवाद करना चाहूंगा। यह बजट िसफर् एक 
फाइनȂिशयल दÎतावेज नहीं, बिÊक हमारे सवȘच्च नेता Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का िवजन डॉक्यूमȂट है। 
मैडम, मȅ िश
क्षा क्षेतर् से आता हूं और ऐसा पहली बार हो रहा है िक जब एिलमȂटर्ी या Îकू ल 
एजुक ेशन को 61 परसȂट बजट एलोके ट िकया गया है। मȅ समझता हूं िक इस से भारत क े Äयूचर की 
नींव मजबूत होगी और िवकिसत भारत और तेजी से िवकिसत भारत बनेगा। मैडम, दुिनया की 
सबसे बड़ी क ंपिनयȗ की टॉप पोजीशन पर भारतीय Ģितभाएं िवराजमान है, ज्यादातर टॉप इंडÎटर्ी 
लीडसर्, आइआईटीज़ और हमारी भारतीय संÎथानȗ क े अÊयुिम नाई हȅ।  Ģधानमंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी ने तकनीकी िशक्षा क े नए सूरज को उगाने का संकÊप िलया है। िपछले 10 वषș मȂ आईआईटीज़ 
मȂ छातर्ȗ की संख्या 100%  बढ़कर 1 लाख, 35,000 हो गई है। यही वे न वाचार  क े बीज हȅ जो 
भिवÍय मȂ किंटग एज िरसचर् को जन्म दȂगे और भारत को वैिÌवक तकनीकी नेतृत्व की ओर अगर्सर 
करȂगे।  महोदया, आज गवर् से सीना चौड़ा हो जाता है, जब भारत को ग्लोबल एआई सिमट पेिरस 
का सह अध्यक्ष बनाया जाता है। हमने देखा, जब अमेिरका क े उपराÍटर्पित ने मोदी जी क े िवजन 
को न क ेवल Îवीकारा, बिÊक दुिनया को उससे सी
ख लेने क े िलए भी कहा। यह गवर् की बात है िक 
Ģधानमंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोद ी जी आज ग्लोबल एआई सिमट की ĢेिसडȂसी भारत लेकर आ रहे हȅ। 
तीन एआई सȂटसर् ऑफ एक्सीलȂस की सफलता क े बाद अब 500 करोड़ की लागत से एक और 
अनूठा एआई सȂटर ऑफ एक्सीलȂस Îथािपत िकया जा रहा है, जो िशक्षा जगत मȂ एआई िडर्वन 
पसर्नलाइज लिनȊग को नई ऊ ँचा
इयȗ तक ले जाएगा। मैडम, आज पूरी दुिनया की नजर भारत की 
Ģगित पर है, लेिकन इन िदनȗ भारत दुिनया क े सबसे िवशाल समागम क ुं भ की वजह से ज्यादा 
चचार् मȂ है। देश मȂ महाकुं भ का िवशाल अयोजन हो रहा है। देश दुिनया से 40 करोड़ लोग पिवतर् 
Îनान करने क े िलए आ रहे हȅ। इसमȂ से 15 लाख से ज्यादा तो िवदेशी है। क ु छ लोग इतने बड़े पवर् 
को एक इकोनॉिमक चÌमे से भी देखते हȅ। उनका अनुमान है िक महाकुं भ से सवा तीन लाख करोड़ 
की कमाई होगी,  लेिकन मȅ समझता हूं िक हमारा देश िसफर् आिर्थकी से नहीं चलता, हमारा देश 
आÎथा से भी चलता है। 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) in the Chair.] 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, िजस पिवतर् जल को हम अमृत समझ कर डुबकी लगाते हȅ, दुख की बात है िक 
क ु छ लोग उसे गंदा पानी कह रहे हȅ और यह भी कह रहे हȅ िक उससे पाप नहीं धुलते या गरीबी 
नहीं िमटती। ऐसा कहना महाकुं भ मȂ आए क ेवल 40 करोड़ Ǜǉालुओं क े मन को ही ठेस नहीं 
पहुंचाता, बिÊक 140 करोड़ भारतीयȗ को भी दुखी करता है। जब आÎथा का मजाक उड़ाया जाए, 
तो िदल दुखता है और जब मजाक उड़ाने वाले लोग इसी सदन मȂ बैठे हȗ, तो दुख क े साथ िनराशा 
भी होती है। िडÃटी चेयरमैन साहब, इस
के  िलए िजतनी भी सफायाइयां दी जाएं, पर ये पाप धुलने 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
77

 
वाले नहीं। इितहास गवाह है िक जब-जब आÎथा आहत हुई है, तब-तब बड़े नुकसान हुए हȅ और 
देश कमजोर हुआ है। मȅ पंजाब से आता हूँ और पंजाब क े एक बहुत ही संजीदा शायर सुरजीत 
पातर जी की क ु छ लाइनȂ आपके  साथ साझा कर
ना चाहूँगा। पातर साहब ने िलखा है – & “If I say 
something, darkness(evil) won’t be  able to tolerate it, but if  I remain silent, what will 
the light (Goodness) say? ” सर, मȅ पंजाब से आता हूँ और हमारी आÎथा का सबसे बड़ा क Ȃ दर् 
Ǜी हिरमंिदर सािहब है। ...(समय की घंटी)... इसके  चार दरवाजे सब धमș का सÇमान करते हȅ। 
यहाँ पर हर भƪ क े भले की अर दास  होती है, लेिकन इस पिवतर् Îथान पर 1984 मȂ ऑपरेशन Åलू 
Îटार मȂ सैिनक-फौज भेजते हुए, टȂकȗ, तोपȗ क े साथ हमला िकया गया। इसके  साथ ही, पिवतर् 
सरोवर को िनदȘष लोगȗ क े खून से लाल कर िदया गया। ...(समय की घं टी)... इसे िसफर् लॉ एंड 
ऑडर्र क े चÌमे से देखा गया। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): इसका बजट से कोई मतलब नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू: अगर इसको आÎथा से देखा जाता, तो यह न होता।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): एक िमनट सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... बहुत सारे Îपीकसर् हȅ और यह 
भी है िक इसे जÊदी-जÊदी खत्म करना है। ...(Ëय
वधान)... माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी आ जाएंगी, तो 
हम एक्Îटर्ा टाइम नहीं ले सकते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू: अंदाज़ा है िक इस हमले मȂ 25,000 से ज्यादा नौजवानȗ को घरȗ से उठा 
िलया गया और वे लापता हो गए। ...(Ëयव
धान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): अगली Îपीकर Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप 
ये बात बोल रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयव
 धान)... आप बोिलए, आपका माइक ऑन है। 
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार (महाराÍटर्): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद 
िक आपने मुझे बजट पर बोलने का मौका िदया। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ अपनी तथा अपनी पाटीर्, राÍटर्वादी काँगर्ेस की तरफ से 
माननीय िव
Ǆ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ǎारा ĢÎतुत जनरल बजट का Îवागत तथा 
समथर्न करती हूँ। मȅ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को लगातार आठवȂ बजट क े िलए बधाई देती हूँ। मȅ इस 
बजट मȂ िक सानȗ , मजदूरȗ, Ëयापािरयȗ, उǏिमयȗ, मिहलाओं, युवाओं, छातर्ȗ और आम आदमी पर 
ध्यान क Ȃिदर्त करने क े िलए माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की सराहना करती हूँ तथा आशा करती हूँ िक 
यह बजट सभी को िवकास क े अवसर Ģदान करेगा।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी और राज्यसभा क े सÇमािनत सदÎयगण, मȅ आज आपके  सम क्ष 
िजÇमेदारी और िवनĦता की गहरी भावना क े साथ खड़ी हूँ, क्यȗिक मȅ इस ĢितिÍठत सदन मȂ 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
78
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
अपना पहला भाषण दे रही हूँ। मेरे िलए यह गवर् की बात है िक मȅ आप सबके  सामने अपनी बात 
रख रही हूँ।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
क Ȃ दर् मȂ एनडीए सरकार ने पूरे िवÌव को एहसास िदलाया है िक भारत एक शिƪशाली देश है। 
आज पूरा िव
Ìव नए भारत की नई उड़ान क े इस अमृत काल का सामना कर रहा है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜी मती  िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने जन-
भावनाओं का ख्याल रखते हुए बहुत शानदार बजट पेश िकया है। यह एक डर्ीम बजट है, जो नई 
कर ËयवÎथा मȂ 12 लाख रुपए  तक की आय को कर मुƪ बनाकर मध्यम वगर् को बड़ी राहत Ģदान 
करता है। कर छू ट मȂ वृिǉ ऐितहािस
क है। इससे कर्य शिƪ बढ़ेगी, माँग बढ़ेगी और अथर्ËयवÎथा 
मजबूत होगी। िनिÌचत रूप  से, इस बजट से हमारे नागिरकȗ को लाभ िमलेगा। यह भारत क े िलए 
गवर् की बात है िक हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा मजबूत हो रही है। आज हम िवÌव की पांचव ीं सबसे बड़ी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा हȅ और जÊद ही तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन जाएंगे। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष 
जी, यह बजट बाजारȗ को ऊजार् देगा, कर्य शिƪ बढ़ाएगा और रोजगार सृजन करेगा। िवशेष रूप  
से, एमएसएमई क्षेतर् को लाभ पहुंचाएगा। इस बजट मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी अनाज उत्पादन योजना क े 
तहत, 100 िजलȗ मȂ क ृिष उत्पादकता, भंडारण सुिवधा, िंसचाई और ऋण सेवाओं को बढ़ाने पर 
िवशेष ध्यान िदया गया है। इस पहल से महाराÍटर् को बहुत लाभ िमलने की उÇमीद है।  कपास और 
दालȗ क े उत्पादन को बढ़ाने संबंधी िनणर्यȗ से भी राज्य को लाभ िमलेगा।  िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् की 
सीमा बढ़ाकर 5 लाख रुपय े करने क े िनणर्य का मȅ Îवाग त करती हूं।   इससे िनिÌचत रूप  से 
िकसानȗ को लाभ होगा।   
मुझे उÇमीद है िक पुणे िजला भी इन 100 िजलȗ मȂ शािमल िकया जाएगा।   माननीय 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, Îटाटर्अÃस क े िलए 20 करोड़  रुपय े की ऋण सीमा क े साथ यह बजट नए 
Ëयवसायȗ क े िवकास को गित देगा और रोजग ार क े अवसर पैदा करेगा।  मȅ बुिनयादी ढांचे क े मुǈे 
पर नई नीित रूपर ेखा और बुिनयादी ढांचा पिरयोजना क े िलए 50 वषीर्य Åयाज मुƪ ऋण योजना 
को जारी रखने का Îवागत करती हूं।  सावर्जिनक िनजी भागीदारी (पीपीपी) पिरयोजनाएं िनजी 
िनवेश को आकिर्षत करȂगी और रोजगार सृजन को बढ़ावा देगी।  महोदय, यह बजट दीघर्कािलक 
आिर्थक िवक
ास सुिनिÌचत करता है, बुिनयादी ढांचे को बढ़ावा देता है तथा क ृिष Îटाटर्अÃस और 
रोजगार सृजन क े िलए मह त्वपूणर् सहायता Ģदान करता है।  यह बजट िनिÌचत रूप  से कई क्षेतर्ȗ 
मȂ महाराÍटर् की Ģगित को मजबूत करेगा और मुझे उÇमीद है िक माननीय Ǜी देवेन्दर् जी 
फडणवीस, माननीय Ǜी अिजत पवार और Ǜी माननीय एकनाथ िंशदे जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ महाराÍटर् 
देश की Ģगित मȂ अगर्णी राज्य बनेगा।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, इस बजट मȂ 52 Ģमुख पयर्टन Îथलȗ को िव
किसत करने की नीित की भी 
घोषणा की गई है।  यह पहल देश को वैिÌवक आिर्थक महाशिƪ बनाने क े िलए महत्वपूणर् है।  मुझे 
उÇमीद है िक माननीय Ǜी फडणवीस जी, मान
नीय Ǜी पवार जी और माननीय Ǜी िंशदे जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ महाराÍटर् भारत को िवकिसत राÍटर् और आिर्थक महाशिƪ बनाने क े Ģधान मंतर्ी नरȂदर् 
मोदी क े Ģयासȗ का पूरा समथर्न करेगा।  इस इस बजट मȂ सरकार ने उड़ान योज
ना को 120 
Îथानȗ पर लागू करने का लÑय रखा है।  ...(समय का घंटी)...  इसमȂ गर्ीनफीÊड हवाई अƿȗ क े 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
79

 
िनमार्ण को Ģाथिमकता दी जाएगी। महाराÍटर् क े पुणे िजले क े पुरंदर मȂ गर्ीनफीÊड एयरपोटर् बन 
रहा है।  इससे क्षेतर् क े लोगȗ को बहुत फायदा होगा।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, दूिषत जल सबसे बड़ा ÎवाÎथ्य जोिखम है।  यह जीवन की गुणवǄा और 
सावर्जिनक ÎवाÎथ्य दोनȗ को खत
रे मȂ डालता है।  पुणे मȂ मुला मुथा नदी Ģदूषण क े िलए सबसे 
संवेदनशील जल िनकायȗ मȂ से एक है।  जयकांथन योजना क े तहत मुला मुथा नदी संरक्षण क े 
िलए 230 क
रोड़ रुपय े का आवंटन िकया गया है।   मुझे आशा है िक इससे मुला-मुथा नदी को 
साफ करने मȂ मदद िमलेगी।  पुणे मȂ यातायात की समÎया िवकराल रूप  लेती जा रही है।  ...(समय 
की घंटी)... इस समÎया से िनपटने क े िलए सावर्जिनक पिरवहन सुधार की जरूरत है।  इस बजट 
मȂ पुणे मैटर्ो क े िलए 837 करोड़ रुपए  का Ģावधान िकया है।  इस
से मैटर्ो िनमार्ण मȂ तेजी आएगी।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा):  सुनेतर्ा जी, समाÃत कीिजए, क्यȗिक िवǄ मंतर्ी जी आ जाएंगी, 
और अभी बहुत से वƪा हȅ बोलने क े िलए।  
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार: साथ ही इस समÎया से छ ुट
कारा पाने क े िलए आस- पास क े शहरȗ 
का िवकास जरूर  होगा।  िलÄट िंसचाई योजनाओं से क ृिष उत्पादकता मȂ उÊलेखनीय सुधार हो 
सकता है। महाराÍटर् सरकार जल संकट वाले क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िंस
चाई सुिवधाएं उपलÅध कर रही हȅ।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा):  धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार: इस बजट मȂ महाराÍटर् क े िलए ऊजार् संरक्षण और िलÄट िंसचाई 
पिरयोजना क े िलए 186.44 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया गया है। मान
नीय, मȅ माननीया िवǄ 
मंतर्ी से अनुरोध करना चाहती हूं िक इस रािश को बढ़ाया जाए, तािक क ृिष िंसचाई मȂ सुधार हो 
सके । उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, िवकिसत भारत क े िन मार्ण क े िलए िवकिसत राज्यȗ का होना बहुत  
जरूरी है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा):  धन्यवाद मैडम। भुबनेÌवर कािलता जी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... िवǄ 
मंतर्ी जी आने वाली हȅ, इसिलए जÊदी खत्म करना है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार: म हाराÍटर् मȂ पहले गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ पिरवहन सुिवधाएं अपयार्Ãत थीं, 
लेिकन अब इसमȂ काफी Ģगित हुई है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): आप सबके  वकील क्यȗ बन रहे हȅ?  ...(Ëयवधान)... सबके  
वकील मत बिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार: म
 हाराÍटर् सरकार ǎारा कई सड़क िवकास योजनाएं चल रही हȅ।  
इस बजट मȂ महाराÍटर् मȂ गर्ामीण पिरवहन को बेहतर बनाने मȂ 683.51 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान 
िकया गया है।  इस रािश को और बढ़ाने की जरूरत  है। 
80
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): धन्यवाद, मैडम।  भुबनेÌवर कािलता जी।   
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी से इस रािश को बढ़ाने 
का अनुरोध करती हूं। मुझे िवÌवास है िक क Ȃ दर् सरकार िविभन्न बुिनयादी ढांचे और िवकास 
पिरयोजना को चरणबǉ तरीके  से पूरा करने क े िलए पूणर् समथर्न Ģदान करेगी। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े 
साथ मȅ अपना भाषण समाÃत करती हूं।   
 
SHRI BHU
BANESWAR KALITA (Assam): Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I would like to 
begin with my observation on the comment made by one of the senior Members in the 
Opposition. The hon. Member said, “This Budget does not have a philosophy; this 
Budget does not have a policy ”. Sir, I want to start by saying that this Budget does 
have a philosophy of recognizing the last man in the line and last village in the country.  
So, development of the last man, developmen t of the last village, and, to begin the 
development with last village is the philosophy of this Budget.  
Sir, if we talk about the policy, there may be differences between the 
Opposition and the Ruling Party. This point has been elaborated very clearly by our 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, himself.   He said and I quote, “I say it with lot of 
pride.  For five to
 six decades, there was no alternative model for the people.  There 
was only one model. After a long time, after 2014, the country got to witness a new 
model.” So, it is a new model.  It is a new philosophy.  It is a new policy. They might 
differ on that.  He further said, “We adopted the approach of saturation. The schemes 
should be delivered 100 per cent. No one should be deprived and pushed towards 
hopelessness. In the past decade, at every level, we have tried to implement 'Sabka 
Saath, Sabka Vikas'. ” That is the philosophy and that is the policy of this 
Government. 
As I have already said, this is th e roadmap to achieve the goal of a Viksit 
Bharat, that is, making India a developed nation. Having been an under-developed 
country, we have suffered a lot but now th e country's aim is to become a developed 
nation, encompassing zero poverty, hundre d percent good quality school education, 
access to high quality affordable and comprehensive h ealth care, hundred percent 
skilled labour with meaningful employme nt, 70 percent women participation in 
economic activities and farmers making our co untry the food basket of the world. So, 
this is the roadmap through which the coun try wants to achieve its goal of being a 
Viksit Bharat. Sir, the Union Budget 2025-26 aims at setting pace for Viksit Bharat. 
The Budget acknowledges that the strength of a country lies in the people, not in the 
soil, and, thus reinvigorates the Modi Government's commitment to ‘ Sabka Saath, 
Sabka Vikas’. Sir, this Budget is holistic.This Bu dget has a multipronged strategy for 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
81

 
accelerating growth, securing inclusive deve lopment, enhancing spending power of 
the India's middle class, invigorating private sector investments and uplifting 
household sentiments. 
Sir, empowering middle class for a better tomorrow means that the income up 
to 12 lakhs of rupees would be exempt from  income tax as against 7 lakhs of rupees 
till now, and more money in the hands of middle class means more spending.  
Globally, the manufacturing industry is a majo r job provider. Thanks to the efforts of 
the Narendra Modi Government, growth in the sector has picked up in recent years. 
According to annual survey of industries… …(Time-bell rings)… Sir, I think, I still have 
some time left. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA ): The problem is that still 19 
speakers are left. Hon. Finance Minister will be  here shortly. So, we have to finish it 
as quickly as possible.  
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Sir, please give me two minutes to speak about my 
own State, Assam and the North East. Sir, Assam has earned the distinction of being 
at rank one in the nation for achieving hund red per cent Direct Benefit Transfer under 
the National Social Assistance Programme. The major milestone was the laying of 
foundation stone of Tata Group’s Rs. 27,000 crore semiconductor facility at Jagiroad, 
promising 15,000 direct jobs, supporting 70 ancillary units. Assam’s effort to attract 
mega investments have resulted in Memora ndum of Understanding with 28 units and 
proposed investment of Rs. 14,800 crore...  
 
THE VICE-CHARMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  Thank you, Kalita ji.  Now, Mr. 
Girirajan.   
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Sir, I will take just two more minutes. Sir, I will not go 
into the technical matters.  I do want to raise... 
 
THE VICE-CHARMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The next speaker is Mr. Girirajan; 
not present.  Shri Dhananjay Mahadik.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): महािदक जी, आप बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक ( महाराÍटर्) : उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आपने मुझे  Union Budget 2025 
पर बोलने का जो मौका िदया है, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। इसके  साथ ही, मȅ हमारे नेता 
82
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
महाराÍटर् क े मुख्यमंतर्ी माननीय देवेन्दर्  फडणवीस जी का और सदन क े नेता माननीय जे.पी. नƿा 
जी का भी आभार Ģकट करता हूं, िजनकी वजह से मȅ आज यहां पर खड़ा हूं।   
महोदय, संसद मȂ और देश क े सामने लगातार आठवीं बार बजट पेश करने क े िल ए मȅ 
माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी, िनमर्ला जी का भी अिभनंदन करता हूं, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने एक िरकॉडर् बनाया है।  
2025 का यह बजट कोई आम बजट नहीं है। यह 2027 तक  देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा को 5 trillion 
economy की ओर ले जाने क े िल
ए एक कदम है और 2047 तक भारत को ' िवकिसत भारत' 
बनाने का जो दृढ़ संकÊप माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी का है, उसकी तरफ एक अहम कदम है।  
इसके  साथ ही साथ, यह देश क े 144 करोड़ लोगȗ की अथर् शिƪ बढ़ाने वाला, उनके  सपन ȗ और 
आकांक्षाओं को पूरा करने वाला तथा उसकी ओर अगर्सर करने वाला बजट है। 
सर, कोिवड महामारी क े बाद दुिनया क े कई सारे देशȗ की अथर्ËयवÎथा िबखर गई, कई 
सारे Ģधान मंतर्ी अपने देश की आिर्थक िÎथित को संभाल नहीं पाए, लेिकन यह भारत ही है, 
िजसकी अथर्ËयवÎथा ने माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, 10 साल से लगातार fastes
t 
growing economy का िरकॉडर् बनाए रखा है।   
सर, इस देश क े बजट का साइज अगर हम 201 2-13 की तुलना मȂ देखȂ, तो 2012-13 मȂ 
16 लाख करोड़ का बजट था, जबिक आज यह 2025 का  जो बजट है, यह 50 लाख 65 हजार  
करोड़ का बजट बन गया है।  िवपक्ष क े हमारे क ु छ साथी यह कह रहे थे िक इस बजट मȂ िमडल 
क्लास क े लोगȗ क े िलए क ु छ भी नहीं है, जो िक इस देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा की रीड की हƿी हȅ, 
लेिकन उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, इस बजट का सबसे ज्यादा लाभ अगर िकसी को हो रहा है, तो िमडल 
क्लास को हो रहा है। जब 2014  मȂ हमारी सरकार आई, तब 2.5 लाख रुपय े तक की इनकम को 
टैक्स से माफ िकया गया था, हमारी सरकार क े िफर आने क े बाद 5 लाख, 7 लाख और अब 12 
लाख रुपय े तक की इनकम को इनकम टैक्स ģी कर िदया गया है और अगर कोई सैलेरीड पसर्न 
है, तो 12 लाख, 75 हजार तक उसको कोई इनक
म टैक्स नहीं लगता है।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, यह घोषणा एक गेम चȂजर घोषणा है। हमने देखा िक िवपक्ष क े हमारे 
क ु छ साथी टीवी चैनÊस पर इंटरËयू देते वƪ बोल रहे थे िक 12 लाख तक का तो ठीक है, लेिकन 
अगर इनक
म 12 लाख, 1 हजार हो जाएगी, तो पूरा 35 Ģितशत इनकम टैक्स भरना पड़ेगा। मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से क ु छ आंकड़े आपके  सामने सदन मȂ और देश क े सामने रखना चा हता हूं। सर, 
अगर 12 लाख तक इनकम है, तो उस पर zero tax है; अगर 16 लाख तक इनकम है, तो 7.5 
परसȂट इनकम टैक्स लगेगा; अगर 18 लाख तक इनकम है, तो 8.8 परसȂट टैक्स लगेगा;  20 
लाख तक इनकम है, तो 10 परसȂट टैक्स लगेगा; 25 लाख इनकम है, तो 13.2 परसȂट टैक्स 
लगेगा और अगर 50 लाख इनकम है, तो उस पर िसफर् 21.6 परस Ȃट टैक्स लगेगा।   तो हमारे 
िवपक्ष क े साथी जो एक fake narrati
ve set करने का Ģयास कर रहे हȅ, उसकी ओर देश का 
ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चा
हता हूं।   सर, यह 12 लाख तक की इनकम पर जो टैक्स माफ िकया है, 
उससे 8 करोड़ से भी ज्यादा पिरवारȗ को लाभ होगा और राजÎव मȂ हमारी सरकार 1 लाख करोड़ 
रुपए  तक की छू ट दे रही है। महोदय, इंसान मेहन त क्यȗ करता है, कमाता क्यȗ है? वह इसिलए 
मेहनत करता है, कमाता है तािक वह अपने पिरवार का पालन-पोषण कर सके , बच्चȗ को अच्छी 
िशक्षा दे सके , Ëयवसाय मȂ, Ëयापार मȂ वृिǉ कर सके , उसके  पास अच्छा घर हो, अच्छी गाड़ी हो, 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
83

 
ÎवाÎथ्य की अच्छी सुिवधा हो। मȅ यह मानता हूँ िक एक लाख करोड़ रुपए  की जो छू ट हमारी 
सरकार दे रही है, यह करोड़ȗ भारतीयȗ का सपना पूरा  करने का काम करेगा।   
महोदय, मȅ दो िदनȗ से िवपक्ष क े सभी सािथयȗ को सुन रहा था ।  वे कहते हȅ िक इस बजट 
मȂ कोई िवज़न नहीं है, यह बजट िनराशाजनक है, िकसानȗ क े िलए क ु छ नहीं है, मिहलाओं क े 
िलए क ु छ नहीं है, एमएसएमई क े िलए क ु छ नहीं है। क ु छ साथी तो यहाँ तक कह रहे थे िक 
भाजपा, मोद
ी सरकार देश क े 80 करोड़  लोगȗ को मुÄत राशन दे रही है, क्यȗिक ये लोग काम 
नहीं कर रहे हȅ, ये गरीब हȅ। मुझे आप बताइए िक  अगर 80 करोड़ लोग काम नहीं कर रहे हȅ, तो 
यह देश क ै से चल रहा है? ये हमारी सर
कार को कोसते-कोसते देश की जनता को भी कोस रहे हȅ 
- यह मȅ आपके  सामने रखना चाहता हूँ। 25 करोड़  लोग गरीबी रेखा से ऊपर आए, उस पर भी 
हँसी-मजाक उड़ाया जाता है। सर, गरीबȗ को जो कमाई हो
ती है..., उसको अपने पिरवार पर 
खचार् करने क े िलए जो खचार् होता है, वह पूरा खचार् अभी सरकार कर रही है। सरकार राशन दे 
रही है, मुÄत गैस दे रही है, शौचालय दे रही है, 4 करोड़ घर बनाए हȅ,  इसकी वजह से उनकी 
आय बढ़ी है और इसिलए 25 करोड़ लोग गरीबी रेखा से ऊपर आए। 
सर, हमारे देश मȂ जो भी िनमार्ण होता है, उनमȂ से 80 परसȂट िनमार्ण एमएसएमई क े 
माध्यम से होता है। जो कर् ेिडट गारंटी Îकीम चल रही है, हमारी सरकार ने उसको 5 करोड़ रुपए  
से बढ़ा कर 10 करोड़  रुपए  कर िदया है,  िजसम Ȃ अगले पाँच साल मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार 1.
5 लाख  
करोड़ रुपए  का िनवेश करेगी। ...(समय की घंटी)...  
सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ खत्म करता हूँ। Îटाटर्अÃस की मयार्दा 10 करोड़ रुपए  से बढ़ा कर 20 
करोड़ रुपए  कर दी गई है। िवपक्ष क े लोग बेरोजगारी की बात कर
ते हȅ। यह बात सही है िक िपछले 
10 सालȗ मȂ Îकू ल, कॉलेज, मेिडकल कॉलेज, इंजीिनयिंरग कॉलेजȗ  की संख्या बढ़ी है, दोगुनी हो 
चुकी है, िज
सकी वजह से पढ़े-िलखे नौजवानȗ की संख्या बढ़ी है, लेिकन हमारी सरकार इन 
नौजवानȗ को रोजगार िदलाने क े िलए Ģितबǉ है। 2014 से पहले देश मȂ कई सारी चीजȂ इंपोटर् 
होती थीं, हम इंपोटर् करते थे, जबिक आज हम भार
ी मातर्ा मȂ एक्सपोटर् कर रहे हȅ। अगर हम िसफर् 
िडफȂ स की बात करȂ, तो 2014 से पहले 80 परसȂट वÎतुएं इंपोटर् की जा ती  थीं, जबिक आज हमारे 
देश मȂ, जो एचएएल जैसी क ंपनी है, िमग, सुखोई, तेजस, धर्ुव, रुदर् जैसे फाइटर Ãलेन्स खुद 
बनाती है। िपछले ही महीने हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने तीन लड़ाकू  जहाजȗ का इनॉगरेशन 
िकया। ...(समय की घं
टी)... आईएनएस सूरत, आईएनएस नीलिगरी आईएनएस िवकर्ांत जैसे 
लड़ाकू  जहाज 100 परसȂट हमारे देश मȂ बने हȅ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): Ǜीमती साधना िंसह।   
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक: सर, हम रोजगार की िंचता पूरी तरह से कर रहे हȅ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): ध
न्यवाद। आपको डेढ़ िमनट एक्Îटर्ा िमल गया। अब साधना िंसह 
जी बोलȂगी, उनकी मेडन Îपीच है। मैडम, क ृपया आप बोिलए। ...( Ëयवधान)... महािदक जी, 
आपकी  जो बची  हुई  Îपीच है, उसको आप ले कर दीिजए, वह आ जाएगी । 
 
84
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Ǜीमती साधना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश):  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज मुझे यह  ऐितहािसक 
अवसर ĢाÃत हुआ है िक मȅ 2025-26 क े बजट पर अपने िवचार राज्य सभा क े इस ĢितिÍठत मंच 
पर रख रही हूँ। महोदय, इस बजट को ĢÎतुत करते हुए Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और िवǄ 
मंतर्ी Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने जो िदशा- िनदȃश िदए हȅ, वे देश की आिर्थक Ģगित क े िलए 
महत्त्वपूणर् हȅ। यह बजट न क ेवल हमारे िवकास को गित देने वाला है, बिÊक समाज क े हर वगर् क े 
उत्थान क े िलए कई योजनाओं की घोषणा करता है। सबसे पहले मȅ मध्य
म वगर् क े िलए बजट मȂ 
िकए गए सुधारȗ की बात करना चाहूँगी। मोदी सरकार ने हमेशा मध्यम वगर् क े उत्थान क े िलए 
Ģयास िकए हȅ और इस बार भी बजट मȂ उन्हȂ मजबूत करने क े िलए कई महत्त्वपूणर् कदम उठाए 
गए हȅ।  मध्यम वगर् क े सपने िजतने बड़े हȗगे, राÍटर् उतना ही बड़ा होगा। 
महोदय, आयकर मȂ छू ट की सीमा बढ़ ा कर उनके  िलए सुधार िकए गए हȅ, इससे आम 
आदमी का जीवन आसान होगा और उसका आत्मिवÌवास बढ़ेगा।  िकसानȗ को लेकर Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी की सरकार हमेशा Ģितबǉ रही है और इस बजट मȂ भी क ृिष क्षेतर् क े िलए कई महत्वपूणर् 
ĢÎताव आए हȅ। सरकार ने 'िकसान सÇमान िनिध' क े तहत िकसानȗ की मदद बढ़ाने क े साथ-सा
थ 
क ृिष उत्पादन बढ़ाने की तकनीकी सुधारȗ की घोषणा की  है। साथ ही क ृिष बुिनयादी ढांचे को 
मजबूत करने क े िलए बजट मȂ िवशेष Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ तािक िकसानȗ को उनकी उपज का 
बेहतर मूÊय िमल सके । िक
सानȗ क े िलए क ृिष ऋण की Åयाज दरȗ मȂ कमी और क ृिष उपकरणȗ क े 
िलए िवǄीय सहायता क े ĢÎताव से उनका जीवन सरल होगा और वे समृǉ हȗगे।  
महोदय, यह बजट शहरी और गर्ा
मीण क्षेतर्ȗ क े बीच क े अंतर को समाÃत करने की िदशा मȂ 
एक अहम कदम है।  गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ रोजगार सृजन, क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ समृिǉ तथा शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
आधारभूत संरचना से देश भर का िवकास होगा। सरकार ने गर्ामीण िवकास क े िलए िवशेष 
योजनाओं की घोषणा की है, िजनसे वहां क े नागिरकȗ का जीवन-Îतर बेहतर ढंग से बढ़ेगा।  
Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की दूरदृिÍट और नेतृत्व क े कारण ही आज भारत ग्लोब ल Ãलेटफामर् 
पर आत्मिनभर्रता की ओर बढ़ रहा है। मोदी जी की नीितयां न क ेवल हमारी आंतिरक अथर्ËयवÎथा 
को मजबूत करती हȅ, बिÊक वह इसे वैिÌवक Ģि तÎपधार् मȂ भी एक बेहतर Îथान िदलाती है। 
 महोदय, यह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े " आत्मिनभर्र भारत" की संकÊपना का बजट है। इसमȂ 
मजबूती है और इससे हमारा देश आने वाले वषș मȂ एक आिर्थक महाशिƪ बनेगा। िवǄ मंतर्ी जी 
ǎारा भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा को मजबूती Ģदान करने क े िलए सुधारȗ की िदशा मȂ कायर् िकया गया 
है। उनकी मेहनत और न
ीितयȗ क े कारण ही हमारे देश ने वैिÌवक मंदी क े बावजूद भी अपनी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा को सशƪ बनाए रखा है। वषर् 2025- 26 क े बजट मȂ उनके  ǎारा िलए गए ऐितहािसक 
िनणर्य भारत को ऊ ंचाइयȗ तक ले जाएंगे। उनकी नीितयȗ क े कारण मध्यम वगर्, मिहला, युवा, 
िकसान, Ëयापारी आिद सभी वगș को सहायता ĢाÃत होगी। महोदय, यह मोदी सरकार का बजट है 
और इस सरकार ने एक ऐितहािसक बजट की ओर अपना एक और कदम आगे बढ़ाया है।    
 
हर योजना मȂ छ ुपा समपर्ण,देश को नई िदशा िदखाई, 
आिर्थक समृिǉ को आधार बना,गरीबȗ का साथ िनभ
ाया, 
िवपक्ष का िवरोध िनरथर्क था, देश ने िवकास की राह अपनाई। 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
85

 
 महोदय, इस बजट मȂ भारत क े समगर् िवकास क े िलए मोदी सरकार ǎारा एक मजबूत 
और िÎथर राÎता तैयार िकया गया है। इस बजट का उǈेÌय िवकास मȂ तेजी लाना, समावेशी 
िवकास सुिनिÌचत करना, िनजी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िनवेश बढ़ाना, मध्यमवगीर्य सिहत सबको साथ लेकर 
चलना है।  
आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से यह बताना चाहती हूँ िक 
िवपक्ष िदÊल
ी से सीखे। िदÊली की जनता ने हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को अपना आशीवार्द िदया है 
और िवपक्ष को करारा जवाब िदया है। िवपक्ष आ दरणीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की नीितयȗ से सीखे 
और समझे।  हमारे मोदी जी देश क े िलए देवपुरूष  हȅ। एक पंिƪ है, िजसको मȅ यहां कहना  
चाहती हूँ: 
जनता क े िदल मȂ वही रहता है, 
जो जनता क े मन की बात करता है, 
भारत देश की शान हȅ मोद
ी, 
जन-जन की आवाज़ हȅ मोदी। 
 
 महोदय, इस अच्छे बजट का हम समथर्न करते हȅ, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) : Shri R. Girirajan, you had missed 
your turn but since the Chairman has a llowed you, you can speak. Will you speak in 
Tamil?  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, both in English and Tamil.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Okay.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I would like to recall that 
in 2019 when our hon. Finance Minister presented her Budget, she quoted from 
Purananooru which is an advice to  Pandya King, Arivudai Nambi. From 2020, she 
regularly quoted Thirukkural in her Budget Speech. But, this time, in 2025, there is no 
mention of Thirukkural or Puranan
 ooru.  But she quoted one Telugu poet, &‘A country 
is not just its soil, a country is its people.” Does this Government really think about the 
people? No. They think about some billionaires of this country. One per cent of our 
population controls 22.6 per cent of the income and wealth is 40.1 per cent.  
 Sir, our Tamil Nadu Government is co ntributing 9.04 per cent to the GDP of 
this country.  But what are we getting by wa y of devolution? It is only 4.8 per cent.  
The 14
th Finance Commission recommended for 42 per cent of tax devolution to 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
86
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
States. The 15 th Finance Commission has reduced it  to 41 per cent. But actual 
devolution is only 32 per cent. I have no jealousy with any other State Government of 
this country. In this Budget, on 1st February, 2025, after half an hour since the speech 
began, our hon. Finance Minister, Tamil magal , mentioned, four times, about new 
schemes for Bihar only. But she did not, even  a single time, utter the name of Tamil 
Nadu in the entire Budget.   
Sir, the Uttar Pradesh Government is contributing 8.19 per cent to GDP but 
they are getting devolution of 17.94 per cen t. Bihar is contributing 2.7 per cent and 
getting back devolution of 10.08 per cent. We contribute more and we are not getting 
proportionate devolution. This is a step-mot herly treatment of this Union Government 
of Tamil Nadu. Hon. Finance Minister, Madam,  Tamil Nadu is not just its soil, Tamil 
Nadu desam also have people. Why is this disc rimination? Why is this step-motherly 
treatment? It is because we are Opposition. Despite that, we can say proudly that we 
are ruling better than this ruling Union Government.  
For education, this Union Government’s allocation is only 2.5 per cent of total 
expenditure. But, our Tamil Nadu Governme nt is allocating 13.6 per cent of total 
expenditure. Regarding the enrolment of stud ents in higher education, the national 
average is 27 per cent. But, in  Tamil Nadu, we have it at 47 per cent even despite the 
devolution partiality of this Union Government. This Union Government is denying 
releasing Samagra Shiksha Abhiyaan  Funds of Rs. 2,152 crore despite several 
requests made by the State Government of  Tamil Nadu. Why is this denial? You are 
compelling us to sign PM SHRI Scheme, wh ich is imposing Hindi on us. We would 
not accept. This is a linguistic terrorism imposed on State Government.  It is because 
of this attitude of this Union Government, 40 lakh Tamil Nadu students are suffering 
now. What was quoted by our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi ji on 
11.06.2014 on this in Lok Sabha, I read, “I have experienced first-hand what happens 
to the State if there is a favourable Gove rnment in Delhi and what happens to the 
State if there is an unfavourable Government in Delhi. I have full experience of this.” --
This was told by our by our hon. Prime Minister. He said, “I have experienced the 
difficulties that the States have to face.  How a State is struggling, how a State is 
neglected, how a State's projects are blocke d for personal gains, how conspiracies 
are headed to prevent the State from deve loping! I have full experience of this. 
Therefore, today, a person who understands  the problems of the States have been 
given the opportunity to serve as the Prime Minister of this country. I am the one who 
knows this pain.” It was told by our hon. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji. That is 
why; he assured in the House that they will, definitely, find a soluti on on this.  It was 
stated by our hon. Prime Minister. He chan ged his original attitude. No! Still, this 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
87

 
Government has wantonly merged the Railway  Budget with Union Budget.  But hon. 
Finance Minister has not utte red Railways anywhere in this Budget. This Budget has 
not allotted funds for speedy completion of the construction of AIIMS at Madurai in 
Tamil Nadu. This Budget has not allotted funds for the construction of Greenfield 
Airport at Parandur in Tam il Nadu. This Budget has not allotted adequate funds to 
develop road infrastructure on National Hi ghways in Tamil Nadu. This Budget has not 
allotted funds for expansion of  Madurai Airport as well as  the establishment of the 
airports at Vellore, Neyveli. This Budget has never allotted a single naya paisa  for 
Tamil Nadu's development. Thank you, Sir.   
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Shri Madan Rathore. 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़ (राजÎथान): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अभी बजट पर चचार् क े दौरान िवपक्ष क े 
सािथयȗ को सुन रहा था। वषर् 2014 मȂ िजस समय देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने 
सǄा संभाली, उस समय की िÎथित क्या थी और आज क्या िÎथित है, मȅ िवपक्षी सािथयȗ को वह 
बताना चाहूंगा। उस समय ĥÍटाचार चरम पर था और यही नहीं, रात को बȅक खुलवाकर, 
टेलीफोन करके  पैसे उठा िदए गए, तब इस Ģकार की अËयवÎथा थी और पूरी चरमराई हुई 
अथर्ËयवÎथा थी। उसके  बाद देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने िजस तरह संभाला और िकतना 
पिरवतर्न आया, यह मȅ थोड़ा बताना चाहूंगा। यूपीए सरकार मȂ फॉरेक्स िरज़वर् 304 िबिलयन डॉलर 
था, जो आज 642 िबिलयन डॉलर है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Rathore Saheb, will you 
authenticate it? …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: िसफर् यही नहीं, उस समय मुदर्ाÎफीित 8.2 थी, जो आज 5.2 है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): राठौड़ साहब आप authenticate करȂगे।  
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: एफडीआई िनमार्ण क्षेतर् मȂ 98 िमिलयन डॉलर था, अभी 165 िमिलयन डॉलर है। 
…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : सर, आप authenticate करने क े िलए बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: सर, इंटरनेट कनेक्शन 25 करोड़ थे…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
88
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): मदन राठौड़ जी आप इसको  authenticate करȂगे। इनका 
authentication लेना। 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: जी, सर मȅ authenticate कर दूंगा। अभी 97 करोड़  है। यही नहीं, उस समय 
परमाणु ऊजार् क्षमता 4,780 मेगावाट थी, अभी 8,180 मेगावाट है। Mobile िनमार्ण क े मामले मȂ उस 
समय क ेवल दो इका
ई थीं, आज भारत दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा मोबाईल फोन िनमार्ता बन गया है।   
Export क े मामले मȂ 466 िबिलयन  डॉलर था, जो आज 777 िबिलयन  डॉलर है। उस समय 387 
Medical colleges थे, आज 706 हȅ।  िपछले 65 वषर् मȂ 51,348 MBBS सीटȂ थीं, आज  1,08,94 0, 
हȅ, यानी िपछले 65 वषș मȂ िजतनी नहीं थीं, उससे अिधक इन दस वषș मȂ कर दी गई हȅ। िपछले 65 
वषș मȂ PG 31,185 seats थीं, लेिकन वतर्मान मȂ 70,645 PG seats  बढ़ गई हȅ। सर, AIIMS की 
बात करȂ, तो पहले क ेवल सात थे, अभी 23 हो गए हȅ। UPA की सरकार मȂ 16 IITs थीं, आज 23 हȅ।  
पहले 13 IIM
s थे, आज 21 IIMs हȅ।   
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी) पीठासीन हुईं ।] 
 
सर, पहले 676 िवÌविवǏालय थे, आज 1,200 से अिधक, लगभग दोगुने हȅ। इन सब 
पिरवतर्नȗ क े बारे मȂ िवपक्ष क े सािथयȗ को समझने की जरूरत  है। पहले 74 airport थे, आज 157 
हȅ।  बहुआयामी गरीबी Ģितशत भी घटा है। Start-ups की संख्या पहले 350 थी, आज सवा लाख 
से अिधक है। आप क्या  तुलना करȂगे? पहले 15  करोड़ जन-धन खाते थे, आज 50 करोड़ से 
अिधक हȅ। Renewable energy क्षमता पहले 76 गीगावॉट  थी, आज 203 गीगावॉट  है। Capital 
expenditur
e 2.51 लाख करोड़ था, आज 11.2 लाख करोड़ है। रक्षा उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ पहले 46 
हजार करोड़ रुपय े खचर्  िकए जाते थे, आज 1.3 लाख करोड़ रुपय े लगाए जा रहे हȅ। सर, पहले 
पांच शहरȗ मȂ metro rail थी, आज 20 शहरȗ मȂ है। राजमागर् िनमार्ण की गित पहले 12 िक
लोमीटर 
Ģितिदन थी, आज 28.3 िकलोमीटर Ģितिदन है। िवǏुतीकरण  की िÎथित 85 Ģितशत थी, आज 
100 Ģितशत है। मȅ आपसे यह िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक पहले गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ 12 घंटे  िबजली 
िमलती थी, आज 22 घंटे  िमल रही है। यह कोई कम बात नहीं है। मोदी जी ने इस देश को बहुत 
संभाला। उन्
हȗने िकसान की भी िंचता की। आप जानते हȅ िक क ृिष क े मामले मȂ कई िजले िपछड़े 
हुए हȅ। जो क ृिष क े क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत िपछड़े हुए हȅ, उनमȂ से हम न े 100 िजलȗ को चुना और उनको 
चुनकर उनमȂ मृदा का परीक्षण करȂगे। ज़मीन से सात-आठ इंच नीचे की िमƺी लेकर उसका 
परीक्षण करवाकर वहां पर िकस Ģकार की फसल हो सकती है, िकस Ģकार का उन्नत बीज िदया 
जा सकता है, ऐसा करके  उन िजलȗ को समृǉ करȂगे। उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ उसको मजबूत करȂगे 
और उसके  बाद 100 िजले लȂगे। इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा आम आदमी क े जीवन Îतर को ऊ ंचा 
उठाने क े िलए मोदी जी ने दी है, यह िवपक्षी सािथयȗ को सम झने की जरूरत  है। िवरोध करना 
ठीक है, क्यȗिक आप िवपक्ष मȂ हȅ और आप अपनी भूिमका िनभाएंगे, लेिकन यह पिरवतर्न जो आया 
है, इससे खुश होना चािहए, इसको उनको समझने की जरूरत है। यही नहीं, उन्हȗने फसल बुआई 
से लेकर मंडी तक चले जाने तक फस
ल बीमा िदया। तब तक हर इÌयू पर कभी  भी कोई दुघर्टना 
हो जाए, आपदा आ जाए, तब भी उस िकसान की फसल बीिमत है। यही नहीं, Enam योजना दी।   
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
89

 
National Agriculture Market, िकसान अपनी फसल को मंडी मȂ registration करवान े क े बाद 
िंहदुÎतान क े िकसी भी क्षेतर् मȂ अपनी फसल बेच सकता है। इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा दी, ऋण 
सुिवधा दी, क्यȗिक एक-साथ फसल माकȃ ट मȂ आती है, तो भाव  घट जाते  हȅ। उस फसल को 
गोदाम मȂ रखने क े बाद वह कहीं भी बेच सकता है। िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् की सीमा को बढ़ाकर 3 
लाख से 5 लाख रुपय े िकया, एमएसपी बढ़ाई, िमिनमम सपोटर् Ģाइस बढ़ाया। इतना ही नहीं, 
सिÅजयȗ और फल उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी काम िक या। मȅ रेल मंतर्ी जी को भी धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगा 
िक हमारे गंगानगर मȂ िकन्नू बहुत Ģचुर मातर्ा मȂ हुआ था और बंगाल मȂ भेजने क े िलए हमने उनसे 
रेलगाड़ी मांगी थी, जो उनके  ǎारा तत्काल दे दी गई, त ािक वहाँ बंगाल क े और लोगȗ को भी 
िकन्नू िमल सके । उन्हȗने हमȂ इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा दी, यानी दर्ुत गित से फसल को क ै से और 
खराब नहीं होने दे, वह माकȃ ट मȂ तत् काल  पहुंचाया जा सके , तािक िकसान को उसका भाव िमले, 
इस पर तत्काल काम िकया। 
 महोदया, यही नहीं लंबे रेसे वाले कपास क े उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् क े िलए मȅ सोचता हूं िक यिद 
इस Ģकार का कपास पैदा िकया गया, तो यह टेक्सटाइल इंडÎटर्ीज मȂ वÎतर् उǏो ग क े िलए 
वरदान सािबत होगा। महोदया, यूिरया संयंतर् भी लगाया गया। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: महोदया,  एमएसएमई मȂ भी डबल िकया, एमएसएमई को भी मजबूत करने की 
कोिशश की, कर् ेिडट गारंटी दी, नया Îटाटर्-अप िदया और रािश को 10 करोड़ रुपय े से बढ़ाकर 
20 करोड़ रुपय े तक देने का Ģावधान भी िकया।  
महोदया, यǏिप समय बहुत कम िम
ला है, लेिकन िफर भी ठी क  है। आपने मुझे बजट पर 
बोलने का समय िदया है, इसके  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): माननीय सदÎय आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  Ǜी रामेÌवर 
तेली जी, आप अपना भाषण आरंभ कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी रामेǚर तेली  ( असम): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ अपनी बात अपनी मातृभाषा 
असिमया मȂ  कहना चाहता हूं।  & Our   Finance   Minister,   Nirmala Sitharaman ji, 
presented the 2025-26 budget. I fully support this Budget and would like to share my 
thoughts on it. Nirmala Sitharaman ji is the only Finance Minister and the only woman 
to have presented the budget eight times. I would like to thank the Finance Minister. 
There are still many speakers who wish to address this Budget; so, I will keep my 
remarks brief. This Budget has been prepar ed with significant consideration prior to 
its presentation. There is one topic in part icular that resonates with me, and I felt 
compelled to speak about it, even if just for a couple of minutes. As a former Member 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Assamese. 
90
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
of Parliament from the Dibrugarh district, Lok Sabha, I received numerous requests 
from people and organizations regarding the Namrup Fertilizer Factory. During my ten 
years in office, I raised this issue in Parliament several ti mes, but unfortunately, it did 
not come to fruition. 
In the 2025-26 Budget, the Namrup fertilizer factory has been mentioned, and I 
am delighted that a fertilizer factory will be established in Namrup with an annual 
capacity of 12.7 metric tons. I would lik e to express my gratitude to our Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, and to the Minister of Fertilizers, J.P. Nadda. I also 
extend my thanks to Finance Minister, Sm t. Nirmala Sitharaman and to our popular 
Chief Minister of Assam, Dr. Himanta Biswa Sarma. It is through the efforts of Dr. 
Himanta Biswa Sarma that the Namrup Fertilizer Factory has become a reality. I would 
like to inform this August House that the Assam Government will hold a 40% share in 
the Namrup Fertilizer Factory. Therefore, I would like to thank all four of these 
remarkable leaders through this House. 
During the Budget discussion, many comments were made and the Opposition 
also voiced several negative statements. One speaker from the Opposition mentioned 
that cockroaches can be found in the food served on trains, questioning how the 
railway system can operate under such conditions. Perhaps he was referring to the 
issues that existed during the Congress period. However, I am not sure if he has 
boarded a train recently, because we now ha ve trains like Vande Bharat. I encourage 
the Member of Parliament to experience  a ride on the Vande Bharat train to 
understand the quality and efficiency it offers. 
Currently, the Union Government, alon g with the Railways Department, is 
actively working on Assam’s railway projec t and significant progress has been made. 
In Assam, electrification is also underway, and many new trains are being introduced. 
I would like to express my gratitude to our Rail Minister for these developments. In this 
Budget, the Kisan Credit Card has been ment ioned as well. Previously, it provided a 
loan limit of 3 lakhs Rupees, which has no w been increased to 5 lakhs Rupees. This 
change will benefit our farmers, and we will place greater emphasis on farming in 
Assam. The Kisan Credit Card will indeed  be advantageous for our agricultural 
community. Additionally, individuals earning a salary who previously paid taxes will 
now receive tax benefits of up to 12 lakhs per annum. Many beneficial provisions have 
been included in this Budget, and I woul d like to thank our Finance Minister once 
again for these initiatives. Furthermore, th e Budget states that 80 crore people will 
receive free rations. Numerous other positi ve measures are also outlined in this 
Budget. In support of this Budget, I extend  my gratitude to the Finance Minister, and 
with that, I conclude my speech.     
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
91

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): सुǛी किवता पाटीदार जी। 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार (मध्य Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे 
बोलने का अवसर िदया। मȅ सवर्Ģथम हमारे देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय मोदी जी और 
िवǄ मंतर्ी, िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को इस उǈेशीय और सवार्ंगीण िवकास को सुिनिÌचत करने वाले 
बजट को रखने क े िलए बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद Ģेिष
त करती हूँ। यह बजट िसफर् आंकड़ȗ का पुिंलदा 
नहीं है, बिÊक इस देश क े 140 करोड़ देशवािस यȗ क े सपनȗ को पंख देने वाली एक युगांतकारी 
पहल है। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की वह Ģितबǉता है, जो आज वादȗ से आगे िनकलकर जमीनी 
हकीकत पर आधािरत है। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस बजट 
को समृिǉ का गुणक बताय
ा है, जो बचत, िनवेश और िवकास क े मागर् को ĢशÎत करेगा। आज 
इस बजट को देखते हुए, मुझे बाबा साहेब डा. अÇबेडकर जी का Îमरण हो रहा है। यह मेरा 
सौभाग्य है िक मȅ भारत क े ǭदय Îथल मध्य Ģदेश क े महू की बेटी हूँ। वह महू, जो बाबा साहेब 
अÇबेडकर जी की जन्म Îथली है। माननीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ पंच तीथș का िनमार्ण िक
या गया 
है, वह जन्म तीथर् उनमȂ से एक है। मुझे यह बताते हुए बहुत हषर् है िक उस ती थर् क े िनमार्ण क े बाद 
Ģधान मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी, िजन्हȗने वहाँ पर माथा टेका, वे नरेन्दर् मोदी जी हȅ। उन्हȗ न े 
िसफर् माथा नहीं टेका, बिÊक बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी की दी हुई सीख को आत्मसात करते हुए, 
उसे पूरा करने का संकÊप िलया। बाबा साहेब ने पूरी दुिनया को समरसता का संदेश िदया और 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय मोदी जी ने सबका साथ, सबका िवकास करके  Ģत्येक वगर् की 
Ģगित को सुिनिÌच
त करने का काम िकया।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मुझे यह बताते हुए बहुत दुख हो रहा है िक काँगर्ेस क े 
लोग, िजन्हȗने बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी का कभी सÇमान नहीं िकया, उन्हȂ हराने का काम िकया, 
वे आज महू की उस धरा पर राजनीितक रोटी सेकने क े िलए पहुंचते हȅ और वे महू की उस जनता 
को, महू की उस पिवतर् भूिम को कलंिकत कर ने का काम करते हȅ। यह कहना िक गंगा मȂ डुबकी 
लगाने से गरीबी दूर नहीं होती, तो महोदया, मȅ यह बताना चाहती हूँ िक सालȗ तक सǄा पर रहने 
वाली काँगर्ेस को यह नहीं पता है िक गरीबी दूर क ै से होती है, लेिकन देश क े यशÎवी Ģध ान मंतर्ी, 
माननीय मोदी जी को बहुत अच्छे से पता है िक गरीबी दूर क ै से होती है। उन्हीं क े सुशासन का 
पिरणाम है िक आज 25 करोड़ जनता गरीबी रेखा से बाहर आई है। आज हर एक Ëयिƪ क े िसर 
पर छत है।   हर घर मȂ नल है और नल मȂ जल है। आज हर गांव तक सड़क बनी हुई है। जब रेल 
की बात आत ी  है, तो मȅ मध्य Ģदेश क े संबंध मȂ क ु छ कहना चाहूंगी। 2014 से पहले क े बजट की 
तुलना मȂ आज एक नहीं, दो नहीं, तीन नहीं, बिÊक 23 गुना ज्यादा बजट बढ़ाकर मध्य Ģदेश को 
रेलवे मȂ िदया गया है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय मोदी जी को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद Ģेिषत करना 
चाहती हूं। आज मध्य Ģदेश मȂ मेिडकल की 2,000 नई सीट्स क े साथ पूरे देश मȂ 75,
000 नई  
मेिडकल सीट्स देकर युवाओं को पढ़ने क े िलए िशक्षा क े नए अवसर Ģदान करने का काम 
माननीय मान
नीय मोदी जी ने िकया है। इतना ही नहीं, जब आिर्थक तंगी क े कारण सांसे थम जाती 
थीं, उन्हȂ जीवन देने का काम भी अगर िकसी ने िकया है, तो आदरणीय मोदी जी ने आयुÍमान 
जैसी योजना देकर िकया है।  मुझे यह बताते हुए बहुत गवर् है िक 70 वष र् से अिधक आयु क े लोगȗ 
को भी इस योजना का लाभ िदया जा रहा है। क ȅसर जैसी जानलेवा बीमारी की जीवन रक्षक 
92
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
दवाओं पर कÎटम ǹूटी  हटाकर आदरणीय मोदी जी ने यह बता िदया है िक ‘सवȃ भवन्तु सुिखन: 
सवȃ सन्तु िनरामया।’ इसके  िलए भी मȅ माननीय मोदी जी को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देती हूं।   
महोदया, मȅ खुद िकसान पुतर्ी हूं और हम सब जा नते हȅ िक िकसानȗ को िवपक्ष ने हमेशा 
चुनावी घोषणा का पातर् समझा है, जबिक माननीय मोदी जी ने िकसान को हमेशा भारतीय िवकास 
क े एजȂडे क े क Ȃ दर् मȂ रखा है। आज िकसान सÇमान िनिध क े साथ, Ģधानमंतर्ी धन-धान्य क ृिष 
योजना क े साथ, दलहनȗ मȂ आत्मिनभर्रता बनाने क े साथ, कर् ेिडट काडर् की ऋण सीमा को 3 लाख 
से बढ़ाकर 5 लाख तक कर िदया है और क ृिष लाभ का धंधा क ै से बने, यह दुिनया को बता िदया 
है।   
आज मिहला होने क े नाते मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को इसि
लए भी धन्यवाद देती हूं िक 
आिर्थक गितिविधयȗ मȂ 70 Ģितशत योगदान मिहलाओं को देकर उन्हȗने आज यह िसǉ कर िदया 
है िक माननीय मोदी जी क े सुशासन मȂ आज बेिटयां फाइटर Ãलेन भी चला रही हȅ और आने वाले 
समय मȂ नारी शिƪ वंदन अिधिन
यम जैसे अभूतपूवर् िनणर्यȗ क े ǎारा इस देश क े नेतृत्व मȂ भी उनकी 
भागीदारी सुिनिÌचत होगी।   
मȅ माननीय मोदी जी को क ोिट-कोिट धन्यवाद इस बात क े िलए भी देती हूं िक जब 
माननीय िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने इस पूरे देश क े सामने बजट ĢÎतुत िकया, तो मध्यमवगीर्य 
पिरवारȗ क े चेहरȗ पर खुिशयां लाने का काम माननीय मोदी जी ने िकया है। बजट मȂ 12 लाख रुपय े 
तक की आय को कर से छू ट Ģदान की है। हम लोग हमेशा मांग करते हȅ िक सवर्Ģथम हम लोगȗ क े 
जीवन मȂ खुिशयां जो लाए, ऐसी गवनर्मȂट हर एक Ëयिƪ चाहत ा है, तो माननीय मोदी जी ने उस 
बात को पिरलिक्षत िकया है।  ...(समय की घंटी)... आज िवकास भी है, तो िवरासत भी है।   
मȅ इतना कहना चाहती हूं िक मिहला सशिƪकरण की ओर बढ़ते हुए आज हमारे माननीय 
मोदी जी क े कदमȗ से हमने यह िद
खाया है िक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार की तीसरी जो 
पारी है, यह उसकी शुरुआत  है और आगे बहुत क ु छ बाकी है। आगे सारा िवÌव मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ इस भारत को िवÌव गुरु  बनते हुए देखेगा। इस संकÊप क े साथ पुन: बहुत-बहुत बधाई देती हूं।  
जय िंहद! जय भारत!          
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी):  धन्यवाद।  Ǜी रामदास अठावले जी। 
 
सामािजक न्य
ाय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मं तर्ी  ( Ǜी रामदास अठावले): आदरणीय 
मैडम:                                    
                                                2025-26 का यह नहीं है खाली बजट, 
यह तो है नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े िवकास का आईना, 
यह बजट सुनकर परेशान हो जाएगा चाइना, 
माननीय खरगे जी, मत छेड़ो नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नैना, 
नहीं तो 2029 मȂ भी हो जा
एगी आपकी दैना 
इस बजट से खुश है मैन कॉमन, 
क्यȗिक अच्छा बजट देने वाली अथर्मंतर्ी हȅ िनमर्ला सीतारमण, 
इस बजट से अब देश मȂ रहेगा अमन, 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
93

 
क्यȗिक बहुत ही Îटर्ॉन्ग हȅ हमारी अथर्मंतर्ी िनमर्ला सीतारमण, 
अब तो ट ू ट रहा है िवपक्षी दल, 
मोदी जी क े हाथ मȂ ही होगा कल, 
पहुंच रहा है घर-घर मȂ नल से जल, 
मोदी जी ही िनकाल सकते हȅ समÎया का हल।  
  
आदरणीया मैडम, यह जो बजट है, यह बजट सामािजक न्
याय क े साथ-साथ आिर्थक 
न्याय देने वाला बजट है। यह बजट नीचे क े आदमी, िमडल आदमी और ऊपर क े भी आदमी, 
सबके  िलए है। यह जो बजट है, यह बजट चाहे बीजेपी का आदम ी हो, कांगर्ेस का आदमी हो, चाहे 
िकसी भी पाटीर् का आदमी हो, सबके  िलए है। यह मध्य Ģदेश क े िलए भी है, कनार्टक क े िलए भी 
है, वेÎट बंगाल क े िलए भी है, असम क े िलए भी है, हमारे महाराÍटर् क े िलए भी है। यह बजट इतना 
important है िक इस बजट मȂ सभी वगș को न्
याय देने की कोिशश हुई है।  इसीिलए: 
 
इस बजट से जाग गई है गाँव-गाँव की गली, 
िबना मतलब मत उड़ाओ हमारे बजट की िखƥी। 
इस बजट से मोदी जी की हो रही है सारे देश मȂ बƥी-बƥी, 
िवरोधी दलȗ की ट ू ट रही है कली-कली। 
जो नेता होता है िवक
ासवादी, 
उनका नाम है नरेन्दर् मोदी। 
पूरे देश की बोल रही है दादी, 
ब हुत ही अच्छे हȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी
। 
 
 मैडम, यह जो बजट है, इस बजट मȂ सभी मंतर्ालयȗ को बहुत ही अच्छा बजट िदया गया 
है। रक्षा मंतर्ालय क े िलए 6,81,000 करोड़ से भी ज्यादा का बजट है; सड़क पि रवहन और 
राजमागर् मंतर्ालय क े िलए 2,87,000 करोड़ का बजट है; रेलवे क े िलए 2,55,000 का बजट है; 
गृह मंतर्ालय क े िलए 2,33,000 करोड़ का बजट है; उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक 
िवतरण क े िलए 2,15,000 करोड़ का बजट है। जो मेरा मंतर्ालय है - सामािजक न् याय और 
अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय, वह सभी लोगȗ को न्याय देता है। जो हमारे पास आते हȅ, हम उनको न्याय 
देते हȅ और जो नहीं आता है, उनको नहीं देते हȅ। िजनको न्याय चािहए, वे हम ार े पास आते हȅ। मेरे 
मंतर्ालय, Social Justice and Empowerment Ministry का बजट 1,68,478 करोड़, इतना बड़ा 
बजट है। टर्ाइबल का 1,29,250 करोड़ का बजट है। दिलत हो, आिदवासी हो, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का 
ध्यान सबकी तरफ होता है। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी सबको देखते हȅ। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने सभी लोगȗ का 
आÏवान िक
या है िक आइए, हमारे साथ आइए, इस लोकतंतर् को बचाने क े िलए हम सब लोग 
िमल कर देश को आगे बढ़ाते हȅ। अगर हमȂ बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी क े संिवधान का भा रत  बनाना 
है, तो बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी ने बहुत बड़ी िजÇमेदारी उठाई थी। बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी ने 
नदी जोड़ने का Ģोगर्ाम announce िकया था। जब बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी Water Resources 
Minister थे, तब आदरणीय पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी Ģधान मंतर्ी थे, ...(समय की घं टी)... 
94
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
उस समय नदी को जोड़ने का Ģोगर्ाम बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी ने बनाया था।  डैम बनाने का 
Ģोगर्ाम भी बाबा साहेब ने बनाया था। डैम से िबजली का िनमार्ण होता है, डैम से पीने क े िलए पानी 
िमलता है, खेती क े िल ए पानी िमलता है। इसिलए बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी का बहुत बड़ा 
योगदान है। इसिलए देश को मजबूत करने क े िलए हम सब लोगȗ को िमल कर आगे बढ़ने की 
आवÌयकता है। इसमȂ िशक्षा क े िलए 1,08,000 करोड़ का बजट है, संचार क े िलए 99,000 करोड़ 
का बजट है, ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ालय क े िलए 99,000 करोड़ का बज
ट है, जल शिƪ क े िलए 96,000 
करोड़ का बजट है। मुझे लगता है िक देश भर मȂ 10 सालȗ मȂ जनधन योजना क े 51 करोड़  से 
ज्यादा अक ाउ ंट्स खुले हȅ और मुदर्ा योजना मȂ कम से कम 56 करोड़ लोगȗ को लोन िमला है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): आप conclude किरए, Ãलीज़। 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: उसके  साथ-साथ, जो हमारी उज्ज्वला योजना है, उसमȂ 10 करोड़ से 
ज्यादा लोगȗ को गैस का िसिंलडर िमला है। 4 करोड़ लोगȗ को आवास भी िमला है, गरीबȗ को 
पक्का मकान िमला है और 12 करोड़ से ज्यादा लोगȗ क े घरȗ मȂ शौचालय पहुंचा है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): थȅक यू। 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: ये सब काम हुए हȅ। कांगर्ेस क े कायर्काल मȂ आपने काम िकया है।  
आदरणीय सोिनया जी इधर आई हȅ। मȅ भी आपके  साथ रहा हूं। मȅ कई साल आपके  साथ रहा हूं।  
आज मȅ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े साथ हूं और मȅ अभ ी इधर ही रहने वाला हूं, उधर आने का िवषय नहीं 
है। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का यह जो बजट है, िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने यह जो बजट िदया है, यह बजट 
बहुत ही Îटर्ांग बजट है, बहुत ही एिक्टव बजट है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी): धन्यवाद, धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: िनमर्ला जी हमारी मिहला अथर् मंतर्ी हȅ। माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी सबको 
न्याय देते हȅ। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने दिलत समाज का राÍटर्पित बनाया, उन्हȗने आिदवासी समाज का 
राÍटर्पित बनाया। नरेन्दर् मोदी साहब ने मुझे भी मंतर्ी बनाया।  ...(समय की घं टी)... मेरी पाटीर् का, 
िरपिÅलकन पाटीर् का, एक भी मȂबर ऑफ पािर्लयामȂट नहीं है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए ।) 
 
आदरणीय सभापित जी, मेरी पाटीर् का एक भी पािर्लयामȂट मȂबर नहीं है, उसके  बावजूद भी 
इन्हȗने मुझे मंतर्ी बनाया है। मȅ तीसरी बार मंतर्ी बना हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ तीसरी बार मंतर्ी बना 
हूं, आप तो पहली बार मंतर्ी बने हȅ। मुझे तीन बार मंतर्ी बनने का मौका िमला है। मोदी सा हब, बाबा 
साहेब को मानते हȅ। उन्हȗने बाबा साहेब क े सभी काम पूरे िकए हȅ। उनके  िलए िजतना भी बजट 
चािहए, उतना बजट उन्हȗने िदया है। महोदय, मुÇबई मȂ बाबा साहेब अंबेडकर जी का एक 
मेमोिरयल बन रहा है। वहां इंदू िमल मȂ कम से कम 1,200 करोड़ से ज्यादा का मेमोिरयल बन रहा 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
95

 
है। वहां बाबा साहेब का Îटैच्यू 350 फीट का है। इस Ģकार, बाबा साहेब अंबेडकर जी का जो 
vision है, उसको जरूर  पूरा करने क े िलए हम सब लोग काम कर रहे हȅ और इसीिलए मȅ इस 
बजट का समथर्न करने क े िलए खड़ा हूँ। हम लोग एनडीए को मजबूत करने क े िलए आगे बढ़ रहे 
हȅ। हमारी सीटȂ जरूर  कम आई हȅ, लेिकन अगर इस वƪ कम सीटȂ आई हȅ, तो अग
ली बार हम 
400 तक पहुंचȂगे, आपकी सीटȂ कम होती जाएंगी और हमारी सीटȂ बढ़ती जाएंगी । हम देश को 
िवकास की िदशा मȂ आगे ले जाने वाले हȅ। यह जो बजट है, यह बहुत बड़े सामािजक न्याय का 
बजट है और इसीिलए मȅ इस बजट का समथर्न करता हूं। जय भी म, जय भारत, जय बजट!   
 
 
CORRIGENDUM TO APPENDIX-V TO THE REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE 
ON THE WAQF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, Papers to be laid on the Table.   Corrigendum to 
Appendix-V to the Report of the Joint Committee on the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 
2024 --  Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni. 
 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI (Maharashtra):  Sir, I lay on the   Table, a copy 
(in English only) of corrigendum to Appendix-V to the Report
%  of the Joint 
Committee on the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka):  Sir, this shows that the Minister had misled the 
House. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it shows that parliamentary institutions are 
blossoming, sentiments are taken into cons ideration and steps are taken. And, this 
gives us another message – we must take recourse to law rather than engage in 
something which people cannot approve, or is to their distaste. If we have anything to 
add on this, it is appreciation, and we want more of such things to happen because it 
is only through exchange by dialogue that things happen. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, it is only becau se of our pressure that the corrigendum 
was presented. I would like the Leader of the House to accept this. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I express my gratitude to the Government because 
the matter was brought to my notice ...(Interruptions)... 
                                                            
% The Report was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha today, the 13th February, 2025. 
96
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  By whom? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And I engaged with the Government.  ...(Interruptions)... The 
Leader of the House met me... ...(Interruptions)...  It is to the Leader of the House 
that I must give... ...(Interruptions)...  If you are asking... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, we brought it  to their notice. They did not do this.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
THE UNION BUDGET, 2025-26-Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Hon. Members, we have Shri H.D.Devgowda, in terms of age and 
experience, the senior-most Member of the Parliament and former Prime Minister. At 
this age, his presence not only in the House but in Committees also is very 
encouraging, inspirational and motivation al to us. I have permitted Shri H.D. 
Devegowda taking into consideration all asp ects.  He will briefly reflect on the Union 
Budget 2025-2026 and the rest will be laid on the Table of the House.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka): Sir, I am grateful to you.  I sent the message 
that I am not keeping well; I will not attend  today's sitting. Having the sympathy, you 
have permitted me to lay the papers on the Table of the House.  
Sir, the Finance Minister has gone into every issue. She has done her best to 
give the support to all sections of society, not only one section. She has done her 
best to protect the interest of the peop le. I congratulate her and the hon. Prime 
Minister also.  One brochure has been prepared by the Prime Minister. I have gone 
through it. All details have been given. I don't want to go against your direction. There 
are four issues. One, youths are coming to cities. Your goodself will understand. The 
population of Bengaluru is on e crore forty lakhs. Why? I have a note. As directed by 
the Chair, I place it on the Table of the House. And the other issue is about the micro, 
small scale and medium industries. I have a note. I place it on the Table of the House. 
Another issue is regarding jackfruit.  I am trying my best. There should be a board for 
tamarind, jackfruit and jamun. I am not talking whether it should in the south or the 
north. In Bihar, Makahana Board has been formed. In Southern States, the jackfruit 
and tamarind is everywhere; even on the road side, it is there.  If a Board is formed, 
the youth will start making value addition products and they will not move to the cities.  
That is one point. The next point is abou t the small-scale industries. I have given a 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
97

 
note. Your goodself has directed me to do so because I am running fever. My 
conscience did not permit me to remain absent.  So, I have come.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sir, place it on the Table.  Don’t strain yourself.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: I will just make one more point about the Godavari-
Cauvery linking project. Our leader is sitti ng here. Drinking wate r is a problem. You 
know that. In Bengaluru City, nearly 1,500 water supply lorries ar e extracting money, 
squeezing the poor people. I will leave it at that stage. There is only one point which I 
will read. The hon. Finance Minister, after ma king the provision of Rs.1,400 crores in 
the Union Budget of 2022-23 for the project, st ated in her Budget Speech that all the 
concerned States would be consulted in the matter of giving approval to the DPR and 
implementing the scheme. This is what hon.  Finance Minister stated. All our friends 
demanded Godavari to Cauvery, if it is be low Mettur, the link is going to be prepared, 
what will we do?  Give us, at least, the Godavari water. Karnatak a is suffering. With 
folded hands, I beg. The hon. Chairman has directed me not to speak much.  I lay it 
on the Table. I have prepared a note on the small-scale industries. Then, rural young 
people are coming to the towns. We have  to see how we can prevent this. I have 
prepared a small note. Four different sheet s are there. Jackfruit and tamarind Board 
should be formed, like Makhana Board.  I have given a note. I will lay it with your kind 
permission. You have understood my difficulty and asked me to lay it on the Table.  I 
am grateful to you, Sir.  
♦ “(i) Ever since the policy makers thought of the city as an engine of economic 
growth, people in rural areas have been forced to live in urban slums.   (ii)There has 
been an uncontrolled migration to the cities in  search of livelihood. (iii) There is very 
little effort being made to ensu re that people live a life of dignity in the villages. There 
is no economic plan being made keeping villages at the centre. The villages have 
become service hubs for cities. This has ha ppened the world over and I do not wish 
to say that India should reverse the whole th ing all together. All that I am trying to 
argue is that there is a need to balance this growth. This balanced growth will not only 
help villages but will help the health of ou r cities too. They will make them more 
liveable. (iv) The migration into rural cities and expansion of cities has also put a lot of 
pressure on infrastructure and resources within cities. For instance, drinking water for 
cities is already an issue and will only become bigger in the years to come. Housing is 
another area that will create big problems.  (v) There has to be an innovative 
                                                            
♦ Laid on the Table. 
 
98
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
development model that restores the urban- rural balance. We have to correct the 
model to ensure our budgetary investments yield much more in the future.   (vi) There 
is yet another consequence of the dist orted development model. Governments 
unable to cater to the aspirations of rural an d semi-rural populations have had to alter 
their welfare models. Here ag ain, they are not focused on  building permanent assets 
for the community or the state, but are mostly  keen to cater to individual aspirations. 
For instance, elected State Governments are less inclined on capital expenditure and 
long-term asset creation but are focused on  individuals receiving cash incentives, 
direct cash transfers etc. (vii) I do not obje ct to individuals getting guarantees in any 
form, but the question is, what happens to permanent asset creation for the society. 
We have to think of the future generations. (viii) In the recent decades, all that we do 
when we talk of the agricultural sector is to discuss MSPs. We do not think in terms of 
irrigation projects. With the pressure of a distorted welfare idea and unmanageable 
guarantees, State Governments are left wi th no money to make big and long-term 
plans.  (ix)  Even when I was prime mi nister the State Governments did not have 
money to complete irrigation projects. Therefore, I had created the Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme in  1996-97 with the objective to  help States to complete 
their irrigation projects. (x) Governments have to think of restoring this economic 
balance to spend on assets that will brin g long-term wealth and prosperity to the 
society. This will also restore the dignity of the people. (xi) The Government should 
seriously think of a legislation that will ensure that State Governments do not spend all 
their money on guarantees bu t on building permanent infr astructural assets for the 
society.   
Sir, my next point is about establishment of Jackfruit, Tamarind and Jamoon 
Board at the national level. 
In the history of Parliament for the fi rst time, I spoke on the importance of 
Jackfruit & Tamarind during the recently  held Monsoon Ssession, 2024 of the 
Parliament.  Both Jackfruit & Tamarind ar e perennial Horticulture crops grown under 
low rainfall tracts across the Country. Even if all other crops fail, either due to 
continuous drought or unexpected heavy ra ins and floods, still these crops flourish, 
come to the rescue of farmers. Similarly,  Jamoon has equal advantages compared to 
Jack fruit and Tamarind. These crops cultivated with very minimal expenditure in 
marginal lands. AI| the three fruit crops ar e considered multipurpose uses, where in 
every part of the tree besi des both main product and by products have multivarious 
health benefits including huge demand in the pharmaceutical companies in addition to 
evergreen trees contributing for ecofriend ly environment. Despite these multiple 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
99

 
benefits many farmers are not harvesting b ecause of lack of market particularly 
Tamarind in the last two years.  
In view of these multipurpose benefi ts, many farmers started growing pure 
crops across the country. There is a huge export demand for these crop produces 
because they are grown organically. Consider ing this various usefulness to farmers, 
rural entrepreneurs to take up Value Addition and Pro cessing creating employment 
opportunities and benefits to economy of the nation at large, there is absolute need 
for establishing National level" Jackfruit, Tamarind and Jamoon Development Board" 
to address end to end issues enabling sust ainable development of these growers and 
profitable marketing of both main products and by-products. 
Sir, about MSME (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises), SME require 
separate tailored policies to sustain growth  and competitiveness. I urge upon the 
Government to implement the following suggestions: MSME new policy is the 
turnover of up to 10 crores for micro, up to 100 crores small and up to 500 cores for 
medium industries.  It is a ppreciable. MSME have to strengthen because, in India, as 
per the registered MSME, it is up to 5.93 co res, providing the job of 18 crores.  Now, 
my humble request to the Government, micr o and small enterprises require separate 
policy because, 10 crores turnover in dustries cannot compete with 500 crores 
turnover industries.  500 crores turnover industries negotiate  the bank rate  of interest 
as per their required rate of interest.  Bu t micro industry people cannot negotiate with 
the bankers.  At the same time, it is the same labour laws applies for the micro, small, 
medium and large-scale manufacturing indust ries.  Micro and small-scale industries 
are different. Bridging the gap between the micro (Rs.10 crores) and medium 
(Rs.500 crores) enterprises is significan tly large, leading to most Government 
benefits being availed by medium enterprises, while Micro and Small enterprises 
struggle to compete. Hence, we all demand  Micro and Small should have separate 
reservation policies. The gap between micro 10-crore and medium 500-crore 
enterprises is significantly large leading to most Government benefits being availed by 
medium enterprises while micro and small enterprises are struggling to compete.  
Hence, I demand micro and small scale should have separate reservation policy. 
Exclusive benefits for micro and sm all enterprises: Currently, 20% of 
Government incentives (subsidies procurem ent quota and financial aid) are reserved 
for MSME. However, recent revisions favour  medium enterprise, leaving micro and 
small business at a disadvan tage. I demand that the creation of distinct benefit 
clauses to safeguard incentives for micro and small enterprises. The penalties 
discourage financial discipline and early lo an repayment. Eliminating them will allow 
SMEs to manage finances more  effectively. In this comp etitive environment, the RBI 
100
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Governor has made a statement, an d the circular is awaited. On 10 th October 2024, 
the Governor of RBI has assured that MSME s will be allowed to prepay loans without 
paying foreclosure penalty. But this has not been addressed till date. 
Regarding Special Credit Linked Capi tal Subsidy (CLCSS) for Technology, 
enablement for micro and small industries was Rs.1 crores for SC & ST. I request 
that the present amount has to be enhanced  to Rs.5 crores to all micro and small 
industries. It is proposed that for MSME  borrowers, the CIBIL score should not be 
considered in cases where the bank has extended one-time facilities, loan waivers, or 
loan closures, regardless of the nature of the assistance provided.  
Here I urge upon the Government to exclude the CIBIL (Credit Information 
Bureau India Limited) at the time of loan  sanctioning. At the same time, reduce the 
loan interest rates to 7 to 8% to enhance competitiveness and Exports can be 
boosted in the global market.  
I further request for a specialized bank ing framework designed to meet the 
unique financial needs of Small and Micro En terprises (SMEs), ensuring they are not 
assessed on the same criteria as medium and small-scale industries.  Jai Hind!” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Leader of the House,  there is a request.   
The remaining speakers are from your Party only.  We will have Finance Minister’s 
reply at 4.00 p.m.  Kindly manage.  Now, Shri Pradip Kumar Varma. 
 
Ǜी Ģदीप क ुमार वमार् (झारखंड): आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे क Ȃदर्ीय बजट 2025-
26 पर चचार् मȂ भाग लेने का अवसर Ģदान िकया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं। मȅ 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी एवं माननीय क Ȃदर्ीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमणजी का ǭदय 
से आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं, िजन्हȗने िवǄ वषर् 2025-26 क े क Ȃदर्ीय बजट को ‘िवकिसत भारत’ 2047 
क े िलए एक रोड मैप क े रूप  मȂ ĢÎतुत िकया है। 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) पीठासीन हुए ।] 
 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े सभी वगș क े समावेशी िवकास क े लÑय एवं 
‘सबका साथ, सबका िवकास’ क े दशर्न क े Ģित Ģितबǉता को दशार्ता यह बजट माननीय िवǄ 
मंतर्ी जी ने ĢÎतुत िकया है। बजट मȂ गर्ामीण समृिǉ क े िलए क ृिष, उǏिमता और रोज़गार सृजन 
क े िलए एमएसएमई, बुिनयादी ढांचे और नवाचार क े िलए िनवेश, आिर्थक वृिǉ क े िलए िनयार्त, 
इन चार क्षेतर्ȗ क े िवकास पर िवशेष ध्यान िदया गया है।  
इस बजट का लÑय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश क े िवकास को गित देना, समावेशी 
िवकास को सुरिक्षत करना, मध्यम वगर् की कर्य शिƪ बढ़ाना, िनजी क्षेतर्ȗ क े िनवेश को Ģेिरत 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
101

 
करना, सुगम बनाना एवं Îवदेशी उत्पादȗ को वैिÌवक बाज़ारȗ मȂ ĢितÎपधीर् तरीके  से लेकर जाना 
Ģमुख रूप  से है।  
शून्य कर Ǜेणी को 12 लाख रुपय े की आय तक बढ़ाकर एवं विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े िलए 
अिर्जत Åयाज पर टीडीएस कटौती की सीमा 50,000 रुपय े से बढ़ाकर एक लाख रुपय े करके  
मध्यम वगर् की कर्य शिƪ बढ़ाने का कायर् इस बजट मȂ िकया गया है।  
आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हम झारखंड क े लोग बड़े सौभाग्यशाली हȅ िक 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का हमेशा से हमारे झारखंड पर िवशेष ध्यान रहता है। उनके  िवगत 
10-11 वषș क े कायर्काल मȂ हर बार क े बजट मȂ झारखंड का िवशेष ध्यान रखा गया है। वषर् 2004 
से 2014 तक कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, तो जहां क ु ल टैक्स कलेक्शन मȂ से झारखंड को 56 हज़ार, 
90 करोड़ रुपए  हÎतांतिरत िकए गए थे, वहीं वषर् 2014 से लेकर 2024 तक 302 Ģितशत की वृिǉ 
करते हुए टैक्स कलेक्शन मȂ से झारखंड को 2 लाख, 26 हज़ार, 444 करोड़ रुपए  हÎतांतिरत 
िकए गए हȅ। भारत सरकार की गर्ान्ट मȂ भी 266 Ģितशत की वृिǉ हुई है। वषर् 2004 से 2014 तक 
जहां 28,509 करोड़ की गर्ान्ट झारखंड को िमली थी, वहीं यह गर्ान्ट बढ़कर अब 1 लाख, 4 
हज़ार, 373 करोड़ रुपय े तक पहुंच गई है। यह दशार्ता है िक आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का और 
बजट मȂ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया का झारखंड पर िवशेष रूप  से ध्यान रहता है।  
रेलवे क े िलए बजटीय एलोके शन की बात करȂ, तो इसमȂ भी 16 गुना वृिǉ देखी गई है। वषर् 
2009 से 2014 मȂ जहां झारखंड को 457 करोड़ रुपय े का बजटीय एलोके शन रेलवे क े िवकास क े 
िलए हुआ था, वहीं वषर् 2014 से  2025 मȂ यह 7,302 करोड़ रुपय े तक पहुंच गया है। झारखंड मȂ 
नई रेल लाइन िबछाने क े 32 नए Ģोजेक्ट्स चल रहे हȅ। 52,885 करोड़ की लागत से क ु ल 3,070 
िकलोमीटर नई रेल लाइन िबछाई जा रही है। झारखंड क े 57 Îटेशंस अमृत Îटेशन क े रूप  मȂ 
िवकिसत िकए जा रहे हȅ। वषर् 2014 क े बाद जब से आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एनडीए 
की सरकार आई है, तब से झारखंड मȂ क ु ल 436 रेल Äलाईओवर एवं अंडरपास िनिर्मत हुए हȅ। 
‘धरती आबा जनजातीय गर्ाम उत्कषर् अिभयान’ क े तहत Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा देश भर मȂ 
63,000 आिदवासी गांवȗ की 5,000 करोड़ से अिधक आिदवासी जनता को लाभ पहुंचाने की जो 
योजना ĢारÇभ की गई है, उसका बहुत बड़ा लाभ झारखंड क े िहÎसे आने वाला है। सर, 2800  
करोड़  रुपय े मȂ झारखंड मȂ 40 एकलËय मॉडल आवासीय िवǏालय बनाए जा रहे हȅ। …(समय की 
घंटी)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय Ģदीप जी, आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी Ģदीप क ुमार वमार् : इसका भी लाभ झारखंड क े आिदवासी समाज को िमलने वाला है। सर, मȅ 
कन्क्लूड करता हूं।  जब से आदरणी
य Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एनडीए की सरकार आई  है, 
तब से हमेशा बजट मȂ झारखंड का ध्यान रखा गया  है।  मȅ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और माननीय 
िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया का िवशेष रूप  से धन्यवाद करते हुए अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं।   
                                                      
उपसभाध्यक्ष  (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : डा. भीम िंसह। 
 
102
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सक्षम सरकार की  योग्य िवǄ मंतर्ी आदरणीय 
Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी क े ǎारा ĢÎतुत िवǄीय वषर् 2025-26 क े बजट क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने 
क े िलए मȅ खड़ा हुआ हूं।  इस  बजट मȂ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान चारȗ तरफ गया है, चाहे पूवर् हो, 
पिÌचम हो, उǄर हो, दिक्षण हो, धरती हो, आसमान हो या समुदर् हो, सवर्तर् उनकी िनगाहȂ गई हȅ। 
उन्हȗने एक खाका ĢÎतुत िकया है, िजससे 2047 मȂ िनिÌचत तौर पर अपना भारत िव किसत  देश 
बनेगा।   बजट सवर्ǛेÍठ है, सवर्समावेशी है और सवर्गुण संपन्न है।  इस बजट से िवकास मȂ तेजी  
आएगी, वह िवकास एकांगी नहीं, बिÊक समावेशी होगा, िवकिसत भारत की आधारिशला होगा।  
आप जब देखȂगे, तो हमारी सरकार, जो सक्षम सरकार है और हमारे नेता, जो िव Ìव नेता हȅ, 
उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार लगातार बजट का आकार ही बढ़ा रही है।  आदरणीय डा. 
मनमोहन िंसह जी, िजनका मȅ आदर से Îमरण करता हूं, उनकी सरकार ने  2013-14 का जब 
अपना अंितम बजट पेश िकया था, तो बजट का आकार 16.5 लाख करोड़  रुपय े था।  उसके  बाद 
हमारी सरकार आई और बजट मȂ लगातार वृिǉ हो रही है और आज बजट का आकार 50.
65 
लाख करोड़ रुपय े हो गया। यह ितगुनी  से भी ज्यादा वृिǉ हमारी सरकार ने की है।  यह क ै से 
हुआ? यह कोई जादू से नहीं हुआ है, बिÊक यह मोदी जी की दूरदृिÍट से, उनकी देशभिƪ से और 
क ुशल िवǄीय Ģबंधन से हुआ है।  इन कारणȗ से आज हमारा देश दुिनया मȂ एक शिƪ क े रूप  मȂ 
उभर रहा है।  आज दुिनया मȂ जो राÍटर्ȗ का मान है, सÇमान है, वह क ेवल arms की पावर पर नहीं 
है, क ेवल शÎतर् की पावर पर ही नहीं है, शिƪ पर नहीं है।  यह राजनियक चल रहा है, जो 
पोिलिटकल िडÃलोमेसी का Îथान आज इकोनो
िमक िडÃलोमेसी ने ले िलया है।  हमारी सरकार 
भारत को एक आिर्थक रूप  से संपन्न राÍटर् बना रही है, इसिलए आज दुिनया मȂ भारत की आवाज़ 
सुनी जा रही है।  यह क ै से हुआ?  हमारी सरकार ने ĥÍटाचार मुƪ शासन िदया है। जहां पहले 
घोटाले पर घोटाले होते रहते थे, आज हमारी सरकार क े लगभग साढ़े दस वषर् बीत गए। िवपक्ष 
का भी कोई Ëयिƪ हमारी सरकार क े िकसी मंतर्ी की ओर एक उंगली भी नहीं उठा सकता है।   इस 
बजट का पिरणाम क्या होगा? इस बजट का पिरणाम गरीबी से मुिƪ होगा, शत-Ģितशत Îकू ल 
िशक्षा और सÎती और सुलभ ÎवाÎथ्य  सुिवध
ाएं होगा।  यही तो चािहए।  िशक्षा हो, ÎवाÎथ्य हो और 
इन सारी ची
ज़ȗ का पिरणाम होगा िक एक हंसता हुआ भारत होगा, भारत क े लोगȗ क े चेहरȗ पर 
मुÎकु राहट होगी।  इसके  िलए हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने इंजनȗ की कÊपना की है।  इनमȂ एिगर्कÊचर 
है, एमएसएमई है, इन्वेÎटमȂट है और एक्सपोटर् है। इन चारȗ क े िलए हमारे िवǄ मंतर्ी ने 
सेक्टरवाइज Ģबंधन िकया है। इसका िरफॉÇडर् Äयूल होगा, ईंधन होगा।  
महोदय हमारी सरकार ने क ृिष क े िलए, एमएसएमई क े िलए और इन्वेÎटमȂट िवÎतार से 
काम िकया है, मȅ उस पर ज्यादा नहीं कहूंगा, क्यȗिक मुझे पाँच िमनट का ही समय िमला है। 
महोदय, मȅ िबहार क े बारे मȂ कहना चा
हूंगा। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया अपना भाषण समाÃत की िजए।  
 
डा. भीम िंसह :  महोदय, मȅ िबहार क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहूंगा।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए।  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
103

 
डा. भीम िंसह :  एक िमनट दे दीिजए।  
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप बोलना बंद कीिजए। Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद, आप अपना 
भाषण आरंभ कीिजए।   
 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद (झारखंड): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मुझे इस बजट पर बोलने का 
अवसर देने हेतु आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आिदत्य जी, आपके  पास पाँच िमनट हȅ।  
 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद (झारखंड):  महोदय, सवर्Ģथम मȅ इस दूरदशीर् और जन कÊयाण
कारी बजट 
क े िलए एक गरीब बाप क े बेटे, गरीब मां क े बेटे, भारत मां क े लाल, देश क े यश Îवी Ģधानमंतर्ी 
और माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का हािर्दक धन्यवाद करता हूं।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारी सरकार ने मिहलाओं, िकसानȗ, युवाओं, िपछड़ȗ, दिलत, 
आिदवासी, सभी समाजȗ, सभी वगș क े िलए तकनीकी िशक्षा और अन्य नागिरक सुिव धाओ ं क े 
संबंध मȂ अभूतपूवर् िवकास िकया है। मेरे गृह राज्य झारखंड, जो  एक आिदवासी जनजाित बहुल 
राज्य है, मुझे उसके  बारे मȂ बताते हुए अपार हषर् है िक धरती आबा जनजाित गर्ाम उत्कषर् क े 
अंतगर्त इस बजट मȂ 80 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया गया है। महोदय, 470 से ज्याद
ा 
एकलËय मॉडल आवासीय िवǏालयȗ, िजनमȂ सवा लाख आिदवासी बच्चȗ को Îकू ली िशक्षा दी जा 
रही है।  
महोदय, िकसान सÇमान िनिध क े रूप  मȂ एक धनरािश, जो एक िनिÌचत समय अंतर ाल 
पर िकसानȗ को सहयोग रािश क े तौर पर दी जाती है, उसे बढ़ाकर 41 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े िकया 
जाना, एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् कदम है। महोदय,  चूँ िक मȅ गांव से आता हूँ, भारत गांवȗ का देश है, 
गांव मȂ िकस
ान रहते हȅ, ‘ िकसान सÇमान िनिध योजना’ क े माध्यम से Ģत्येक चार महीने मȂ जो 
रािश Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने िकसानȗ को देने का काम शुरू  िकया है, उसके  िलए मȅ बताना चाहता हूं 
िक मȅ अकस र  देखता था िक जब िकसान का खेती करने का समय आता था, तो मां बेटे से पूछती 
थी िक बेटा, बीज कब आएगा, खाद कब आएगी? िपताजी भी बेटे से पूछते थे, लेिकन बेटे क े पास 
पैसा नहीं रह
ता था। वह मजबूरी मȂ अपने खेत मȂ फसल नहीं लगा पाता था। िकसान मां और 
िपताजी, दोनȗ रोते थे। महोदय, वैसे िकसानȗ की आंखȗ क े आंसुओं को पȗछने का काम Ģधानमंतर्ी 
जी ने िकया है। आज िकसान सÇमानपूवर्क, सीना तानकर खेतȗ मȂ फसल लगाने का काम कर रहा 
है। मुझे गवर् है िक देश आजाद होने क े बाद हम लोग िजस Ģकार से गांव मȂ कच्ची सड़कȗ पर 
चलते थे, कभी सड़क पर चल नहीं पाते थे, बरसात क े मौस म मȂ जब Îकू ल जाते थे, तो कभी 
सड़क पर नहीं चल पाते थे, पगडंिडयȗ पर चलते हुए, आरȗ मȂ चलते हुए, जंगलȗ मȂ चलते हुए 7 
िकलोमीटर की दूरी तय करके  जब हाई Îकू ल जाते थे, तो ऐसा लगता था िक हम सपने मȂ भी 
पक्की सड़क देखने का काम नहीं करȂगे। लेिकन ‘ Ģधानमंतर्ी गर्ाम सड़क योजना’ क े माध्यम से 
Îवगीर्य अट
ल जी ने इस कायर्कर्म को शुरू  िकया। उन्हȗने सड़क बनाने की Ģथा शुरू  की और 
झारखंड राज्य सौभाग्यशाली है िक अलग राज्य होने क े बाद 2002 मȂ, Îवगीर्य अटल िबहारी 
104
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
वाजपेयी जी ने झारखंड राज्य क े रांची िजले क े दुबिलया गांव मȂ इस योजना की शुरुआत  की।  
हम लोग इस बात क े गवाह हȅ।  
महोदय 25,000 बिÎतयाँ, जो Îलम एिरयाज हȅ, िजनमȂ गरीब लोग रहते हȅ, िकसान रहते 
हȅ, गांव का िकसान सड़क क े अभाव मȂ सÅजी उपजाता था, खेती करता था, लेिकन बाजार नहीं 
पहुंच पाता था
। वह साइिकल को धक्का देते-देते भरुआ  मȂ, बोझा मȂ जाता था। दीदी लोग, मां लोग 
खांची मȂ सÅजी लेकर बाजार जाती थीं, लेिकन वे या तो देर से बाजार पहुंचती थीं या पहुंच नहीं 
पाती थीं। यिद बाजार पहुंचती भी थीं, तो सÅजी िबकत
ी नहीं थी। जब सÅजी नहीं िबकती थी, तो 
िकसान वहाँ पर सिÅजयाँ फ ȅककर चला आता था या िबचौिलया को औने-पोने दामȗ मȂ बेचने का 
काम करता था। आज Ģधानमंतर्ी जी की देन है िक गांव का िकसान सीना तानक
र, सीना चौड़ा 
करके  बाजार मȂ जाता है और सÇमानपूवर्क सÅजी और जो भी खेती करता है, उसका उि चत मूÊय 
लेने का काम करता है। 
 महोदय, मȅ रेल पर बात करना चाहता हूं। हम लोग िसनेमा मȂ देखते थे, टीवी मȂ देखते थे 
िक िजस Ģकार से वंदे भारत, अमृत भारत, नमो भारत टर्ेन्स चल रही हȅ, हम लोगȗ ने उनक ो कभी 
सामने से देखा नहीं था, लेिकन वतर्मान मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ और माननीय मंतर्ी जी, 
अिÌवनी क ुमार जी क े सफल संचालन मȂ इस Ģकार की टर्ेन्स चल रही हȅ। महोदय 2004 से 14 क े 
बीच, जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, उससे पहले अटल िबहारी बाजपेयी जी ने झ
ारखंड राज्य मȂ 
कोडरमा से हजारीबाग होते हुए, राँची तक एक रेल लाइन का िशलान्यास िकया था। जब दस वषș 
तक काँगर्ेस की सरकार चली, तब वे उस लाइन पर एक पत्थर का ढेला भी नहीं रख पाए। जब 
2014 मȂ भारत माँ क े लाल देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान
मंतर्ी बने, तो सरपट रेल लाइन चली। आज वहाँ 
पर तेजी क े साथ टर्ेनȂ चल रही हȅ और देहात मȂ, गांव मȂ रहने वाली माताएं-बहनȂ, जंगल
ȗ मȂ रहने 
वाली माताएं-बहनȂ दातुन, पǄे तोड़कर शहर जाती हȅ, सÅजी उगाकर शहर जाती हȅ और सामान 
बेचकर हंसते हुए घर लौटने का काम करती हȅ। ऐसे ही गरीब माता-िपता, िकसानȗ का आशीवार्द 
देश क े यशÎ
वी Ģधान मंतर्ी और इस सरकार को ĢाÃत है। महोदय, इस बजट क े माध्यम से, मȅ 
कहना चाहूँगा िक चूंिक मȅ गांव से आता हूँ, मध्यम वगर् क े लोगȗ, िकसान लोगȗ को जो टैक्स देना 
पड़ता था ...(समय की घं
टी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आिदत्य Ģसाद जी, समाÃत करȂ।    
 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद: उन्हȂ 12 लाख की जो सिÅसडी दी गई है, लोग उसकी सराहना कर ने का काम 
कर रहे हȅ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ। 
 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद: महोदय, एक िमनट और दीिजए।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : नहीं, आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ। 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
105

 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद: गाँव का गरीब Ëयिƪ पैसे क े अभाव मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): Ǜी रामभाई हरजीभाई मोकिरया। आपका भाषण समाÃत 
हुआ। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद: बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी रामभाई हरजीभाई मोकिरया (गुजरात): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ इस सद
न  मȂ बजट क े 
समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। सबसे पहले, मȅ िदÊली की भËय जीत क े िलए माननीय 
नरेन्दर् मोदी साहब को धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ। साथ-ही-साथ, हमारे नƿा जी को भी धन्यवाद 
देता हूँ िक काफी समय क े बाद िदÊली मȂ बीजेपी का शास
न आया है और बीजेपी क े समिर्पत 
कायर्कतार् को भी धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक उन्हȗने पाटीर् क े िलए अच्छा काम िकया है। साथ-ही-साथ, मȅ 
िदÊली क े मत
दाताओं को भी धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ िक हमारी सौ साल पुरानी पाटीर् की हैिटर्क 
लगवा दी और  एक बार नहीं, बिÊक तीन-तीन बार जीरो देकर घर िबठा िदया। इससे बड़ा 
सौभाग्य क्या हो सकता है! ...(Ëयवधान)... आप मेरी बात सुिनए। मȅ आपकी बात सुनत ा हूँ। यह 
सवार्ंगीण िवकास का बजट है। यह बजट गरीब, मिहला, िकसान और युवा को लÑय मȂ रखकर 
बनाया गया है। इस बजट मȂ लेदर इंडÎटर्ी, िखलौना उǏोग पर िवशेष भार देकर, मेक इन इंिडया 
पर भार िदया गया है। इस बजट मȂ िडिजटल इंिडया पर िव
शेष भार िदया गया है। देश भर मȂ 5G 
और एआई उǏोग को बढ़ावा िदया जाएगा। इसके  िलए बजट मȂ Ģावधान िकया गया है।  
महोदय, इस बजट मȂ िशक्षा, कौशल और आरोग्य क े िलए भी िवशेष Ģावधान हȅ। आयुÍमान 
भारत योजना का आरोग्य बीमा कवच पाँच लाख से बढ़ाकर दस लाख करने को लेकर कहा है, 
िजससे Ģत्येक समाज को लाभ िम
लेगा। इसके  साथ ही, Ģत्येक िजला Îतर पर उप चार  क Ȃ दर् 
Îथािपत करने की घोषणा की गई है। क ȅसर और असाध्य रोगȗ क े उपचार क े िलए Ģत्येक िजला 
Îतर क े अÎपताल मȂ डे क ेयर क ȅसर सȂटर ĢितÎथािपत िकए जाएंगे।  
इस बजट मȂ िशक्षा पर भार देते हुए नई िशक्षा नी ित को बढ़ावा िदया गया है। गर्ामीण Îतर 
पर सौ नए Îमाटर् रूम बनाने जा रहे हȅ। सरकारी शाला मȂ पढ़ने वाले बच्चȗ मȂ वैज्ञािनक सोच को 
बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 50,000 Îकू लȗ मȂ अटल िंटकिंरग Ģयोगशाला Îथािपत हȗगी। Ģत्येक िजले मȂ 
एक मेिडकल कॉलेज Îथािपत होगा, िजसके  कारण 75,000 मेिडकल सी
टȗ को बढ़ावा िमलेगा। 
युवाओं को मेिडकल अÆयास क े िलए िवदेश या अन्य Îटेट मȂ नहीं जाना पड़ेगा। देश भर मȂ 500 नए 
आईटीआईज़ ĢितÎथािपत हȗगे, िजसके  कारण युवाओं मȂ कौशल शिƪ बढ़ेगी। युवाओं को 
िडिजटल नौकिरयाँ उपलÅध हȗगी।  
सर, मोदी जी क े शासन मȂ कई साल से 80 करोड़ लोगȗ को मुÄत अनाज िम
ल रहा है। यह 
तो मोदी सरकार दे रही है। हमारे opposition वाले खुद तो ग रीब  लोगȗ क ु छ नहीं दे पाए और अब 
इसमȂ भी िवरोध कर रहे हȅ। यह गलत बात है। नागिरकȗ को मुÄत अनाज िमल रहा है, वह भी मोदी 
साहब क े िहसाब से िमल रहा है। चार करोड़ गरीबȗ को Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना का लाभ िमल 
गया है। 12 करोड़ पिरवारȗ को टॉयलेट िमला है। 55 करोड़ लोगȗ क े जन धन खाते खोले गए हȅ। 
50 करोड़ लोगȗ को बीमा कवच से जो
ड़ा गया है। अभी नई बात यह आई है िक चाहे कोई अमीर 
106
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
हो, गरीब हो, िपछड़ा हो, अगड़ा हो, 70 साल की उĦ से ऊपर वाले सभी लोगȗ को मुÄत इलाज 
िमलने वाला है। 
 
4.00 P.M.  
 
यह भारत देश मȂ सबसे बड़ी उपलिÅध है।  फॉरेन मȂ कहीं भी ऐसा िसÎटम नहीं है, लेिकन यह 
िसÎटम मोदी साहब ǎारा अमल मȂ लाया गया है।   इसके  िलए मȅ मोदी साहब को  धन्यव
 ाद देता हूं।                        
 महोदय, यह बजट समावेशी है, परंतु समय क े साथ चलते हुए बजट का समथर्न करते 
हुए, िवकिसत भारत क े िलए घोिषत िकए गए इस बजट क े िलए मȅ अपने ǭदय से माननीय मोदी 
जी और िवǄ मंतर्ी िनमर्ला सीतारमण दीदी को धन्
यवाद देते हुए अपनी वाणी को िवराम देता हूं। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Hon. Minister of Finance to 
reply to the discussion.  Now, hon. Finance Minister. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I guess, more than 
90 speakers have participated and I thank th em. The last count when I entered this 
House was 88. Now, I think, subsequently, fo ur or five more have  been added. More 
than 90 speakers have participated in this de bate. And, I am grateful that they have 
spoken so much in detail about the various pr ovisions made in the Budget. I will try to 
answer most of their concerns, questions, seeking clarification by grouping the 
questions and concerns raised to broadly about 16 different categories. They have 
been grouped and I will try to speak about them.   
At the very beginning,
 I would want to underline the fact that this Budget has 
been made during a very difficult time. The challenges, particularly the external 
challenges, are very, very severe, most of which are beyond even any projections or 
predictions. There are no models that yo u can build and understand how the trends 
will be because they are very dynamic and they  are changing by the day. So, it is very 
difficult to reasonably plan up for a Budget. But despite that, we have tried keeping 
the assessments as close as possible to wh at can develop keeping India’s interest 
top-most. This immense uncertainty is still playing out and many Indian imports which 
are very critical for our economy to grow are also going to be left with uncertainty. We 
are trying to make sure that the Budget so mewhat, at least, foresees all these and is 
ready for such eventualities. But, even as we say about these things, the Budget has 
very clearly identified the di fficulties that are before us. Of course, all these years, 
possibly even decades, we have been talking about globalization; now, we are facing 
a situation of fragmentation of the world. The post-Covid times has made States to 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
107

 
borrow, not just Indian States but countries to borrow to meet with specific difficulties 
that they have to face and also hand-hold people, and at the same time, give growth 
impetus. It has led to a situation where countries are borrowing, and rising debt is a 
problem whereas fiscal prudence has always  been the matter which gets advocated. 
People tell that economies will have to be managed more fisc ally, prudent-wise. 
Globalization versus fragmentation, which is a reality; fiscal prudence versus growing 
global debt, which is a reality, and, everybody wants to have free market situation but 
you have aggressive tariff barriers and no n-tariff barriers. Yo u are facing a world 
where a lot of talk goes on about to keep  the markets free, but no one country wants 
to have free market when it comes to thei r interest. With all this, the usual practice 
would be that you will approach multinational institutions to seek redressal or to seek 
handholding. Multilateral forums have also become today very diluted. They seem to 
be there but not really exerting themselves  even with the given framework of things. 
Bilateral partnerships and regional forums are the ones which are really governing the 
situation. So, much contrary to all those principles with which the world has moved in 
terms of an economic order is all going through a major change. 
So, the uncertainties can be defined in  some terms, but you really cannot 
predict what moves. In this situation, th e first advanced estimates from the NSO has 
said that India's economy will grow by 6. 4 per cent in real terms and about 9.7 per 
cent in nominal terms. In the Budget this year, we have kept our goals in such a way 
that we are able to accelerate growth, s ecure inclusive development, invigorate 
private sector investments, uplift household se ntiments and also directly or indirectly, 
to enhance spending power of the Indian rising middle class. In all this, we have seen 
that there are four groups of  people that if you touch and serve, the impact will be 
across the country-- gareeb, youth, annadata and naari. Therefore, every scheme 
that we have before us, has something to bring in terms of benefits for these four 
large groups.  
Sir, I want to take a minute to put it before this august House.  When we are 
talking about capital expenditure--becau se I have heard quite a few Members 
speaking about how capital expenditure is probably coming down, the shift is now 
from moving away from capital expenditure to boosting consumption--I just want to 
highlight the thought about or the idea of effective capital expenditure. What it does 
include is core capital outlays in the Un ion Budget and also the grants-in-aid for 
creation of capital assets to the States. Though the grants-in-aid for creation of 
capital assets is accounted as revenue expenditure in the books of the Union 
Government, yet they go to the States to create capital assets and, therefore, they 
are also effectively, eventually, only capital expenditure.  In the Budget, 2025-26, 
108
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
which is before us, the effective capital ex penditure is projected at Rs. 15.48 lakh 
crore as against Rs. 13.18 lakh crore in the RE of 2024-25. So there is just no 
reduction in capital expenditure. But even more , if we take this together with what is 
done by the public enterprises, they are independent of the Bu dget, they do their 
own.  But they also account for the capital ex penditure. If we were to take that also 
on board, we take that public enterprise s raise from their own resources when they 
invest money for capital expend iture, they do it substantia lly. So, if I were to include 
that for the year 2025-26, the capital outlay  which I would define as effective capital 
expenditure, is likely to be in the rang e of Rs.19.80 lakh crores. On the concern 
expressed by some Members, which I take up in detail a bit later, but right upfront 
saying, “Have sectors been denied money? Have some sectors received lesser than 
what they received last year? ”, I just want to assure the House in terms of the 
numbers that have been presented in the Bu dget and restate them.  Sectoral outlays 
for 2025-26 - agriculture and allied activities,  Rs.1.71 lakh crores; Rural development, 
Rs.2.67 lakh crores. These are already given in the Budget. It is before us. Urban 
development and transport, Rs.6.45 lakh crores; health and education, Rs.2.27 lakh 
crores and defence spending excluding defe nce pension is Rs.4.92 lakh crores. So 
we have not cut down on any sectoral allocations. The total resources being 
transferred to the States in 2025-26 is Rs.25.01 lakh crores. Resources being 
transferred to the States show  an increase of Rs.4.92 lakh crores over the actuals of 
2023-24. So, the portion which has to go to the States is also not cut down. On the 
contrary, substantial increase has been ma de in them. I have spoken specifically 
about capital expenditure and also sectoral allocations. Because this is the Upper 
House, where very experienced Members comi ng from various walks of life are here 
and Members, who have been in Governments,  are here, I want to highlight a feature 
of Budget-making in the last four-five years, which speak for themselves.  
Just two examples for each of the year s, which is very important considering 
that Members would be eager to know as to  how public finance is being managed.  
Sir, I begin with a contrast, not so much for talking about whose period it was, 
whether it is my period or your period. Bu t when crisis hit countries, when crisis will 
have to be managed and when managing crisis, you will have to adopt some methods 
and post that the revival, in that sense, I would like to just compare between the 
global financial crisis as opposed to the crisis of Covid-19, when Indian Government’s 
attempt resulted that India became Fragile Five whereas after Covid, the attempt that 
has been made with targeted support to people who needed he lp, has lifted India 
from the position where it was in Fragile Five post Covid from where it was to where 
we are today, on the top five economies.  So, the measures that have been taken are 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
109

 
not attributable to one Budget itself.  It has been sustained over several budgets since 
2020. I want to highlight some features abou t that from each of them. For instance, in 
2020-21, Budget reveals recurrent themes. Fr om then, it reveals recurring themes of 
transparency to foster credibility of Budg et making, reforms to capitalize growth, 
targeted social security and use of technol ogy for obtaining value for public money.  I 
think it is a very appreciable point. Tod ay, all over the country, concern about how 
effectively the taxpayers' rupee is being spent, is widely heard. You hear from 
different sections of the society talking about taxpayers' money, which is a right 
concern citizens should have.  I just want to highlight that in 2020-2021 Budget, we 
brought in the element of transparency an d strengthening cooperative federalism.  
How did we do it!  We took a big step of bringing on board FCI, the Food Corporation 
of India's off-budget borrowing of about Rs .1.2 lakh crores onto the Budget. We 
said, ‘Yes, it might hit us from the point of vi ew of fiscal deficit, but we will have to do 
it, bring in credibility to the budget making  and transparency.’ We  also strengthened 
the partnership with the States. It is that year that not because Finance Commission 
has recommended it, not at all, but we br ought in a 50-year interest-free capital 
assistance to the States, which was not on the basis of a recommendation which the 
Finance Commission gave.  But we started the process then, and when we started it, 
we just extended Rs.12,000 crores to the St ates saying, ‘For 50 years, you take it.  
No interest to pay. You can go ahead with what you want to do in terms of capital 
expenses.’ All States!  All states, no State le ft out in that. And, that Rs.12,000 crores 
of 2020-21, today for this ye ar, has reached Rs.1,50,000 cr ores. Fifty year interest 
free!  Budget for this year gives Rs.1,50, 000 crores for States. They can choose the 
projects they want to do and complete it as set building. So, that has been started 
from 2020-21 and every year some amount ha s been growing and it has reached this 
level today. In 2021-22, again, fiscal transparency and technology adoption was taken 
up for the Budget making. We regularized lo ng pending, outstanding dues. And, this 
is very interesting, Sir. And I am sure the House will appreciate this point that we 
regularized long pending outstanding dues amounting to over Rs.81,000 crores 
payable to the States under devolution of  Central taxes for the period. So, I was 
astonished when I started working on it.  But I am glad to say that we resolved it.  
Rs.81,000 crores, for the period, beginning 1996-97 and till 2017-18, we had to do the 
calculations to make sure every State, of  this due of Rs.81,000 crores, which has 
been pending over decades, is given that money back.  We did that in 2021.   
Hon. Prime Minister has been Chief Minister of a State. He knew the difficulties 
of States and he said, ‘Please, sit and clear this up. I don’t want this waiting. It has 
been waiting since 1997.  Clear it.’  Sir, we  had cleared Rs. 81,000  crores in the year 
110
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
2021-22. I am very happy that we had sorted that out after consultations with States. I 
told you, previous year, we took on-board  the Food Corporation of India’s amounts 
which were off-budget borrowings. This year , after having given States their dues 
pending from 1996-97, we took on-board the off-budget borrowings of urban 
housing of the Ministry of Urban Developm ent. Sir, Rs. 33,000 crores, which were 
off-budget borrowings, was brought back onto  the Budget. It means, we have taken 
the responsibility to address this. And, we al so prepaid it. I would like to highlight the 
fact that clearing debt prior to its due time  has also been methodically taken up in 
each one of our Budget exercises. That was done in 2021-22. And, the third step is 
use of technology. We used technology so th at States and Centre will be clear as to 
where money lies, they can see flow of money and see where the treasury is receiving 
money for which project and, therefore, go ahead with State's contribution and build 
that. So, there is a single nodal agency for timely release of money, with technology 
driven, so that everybody kn ows where the money lies. It was brought in 2021-22. It 
has actually reformed. There are later inst ances which I will explain about how that 
has helped us to see where money is lying id le and, therefore, to that extent, borrow 
less and pay less interest. So, it has helped in fiscal management.  
In 2022-23, debt consolidation was give n a big priority. Strengthening States' 
liquidity position has been a big priority. I will just give an example. Hon. Railway 
Minister is just sitting next to me. We have commenced complete financing of the 
capital outlays of Railways and Highways  from the Union Budget. So, this has 
lowered the cost of borrowings for Railways for their projects and, as a result, today, 
we are able to speedily fund their capital investments. We also advanced -- this will 
be very much in favour of the States --  the devolution date. Every month tax is 
devolved to the States. For years, it had been done on 20th of the month. We said, 
‘Why should it go in the middle of the mont h? Why can't it be paid earlier?’ So, we 
moved the date from 20th of the month to 10 th of the month itself so that States can 
get it earlier. That was done so that the cash position in the States can be improved.  
Sir, we also did one more thing for the Budget. Every year you have your 
Budget Estimates given during the Budget pr esentation and in the middle of the year 
suddenly one programme loses enough money and they say, ‘We need more. So, will 
you raise it in the Supplemen tary Demands for Grants?’ We ll; there was a practise all 
the while to have three times Supplementary Demands. So it had two implications – 
one, your estimates were going for a toss or your estimate itself was not based on the 
data which you get from the ground. And, therefore, we wanted to streamline that 
and from that year, 2022-23, we brought in a fairly clear system of having 
Supplementary Demands, but only twice in a year, so that you are able to bring in a 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
111

 
BE which is far more realistic rather than go along the year and keep adding 
Supplementary Demands. So, we have brou ght in that kind of a discipline for 
ourselves much more than for anybody and that is paying adequate rewards.  
Last year, 2023-24, we made sure the taxpayers get a relief. So, the new tax 
regime was brought in and we made it as the default regime, so that unless a person 
wants exemption, he will be part of the Ne w Tax Regime. But, if he states that he 
wants to be in the old, he can still be in the old, if he thinks he is better off in that. So, 
we have brought that in and we also raised  the tax limit; meaning,  up to Rs. 7 lakhs 
income, you don't pay tax at all in that year. It means, marginal relief being given to 
the taxpayer. That an individual doesn't need to pay tax up to Rs. 7.27 lakhs was 
brought in 2023-24. Of course , this year, we have gone up to the level of Rs. 12 
lakhs. 
So, 2023-24 also saw a special scheme  for women, Mahila Samman Bachat 
Patra. We brought it in 2023-24 with very hi gh interest for them, so that they benefit 
out of that money. We also doubled deposi t limits in senior citizens savings schemes 
and monthly income schemes. So, that way, we were continuously bringing changes.  
And if I come to the current Budget, Sir, yo u will see the trend is continuing; that is, 
the new instrument of service limits in 2024-25 Budget, the July Budget, means, 
Ministries will be given higher limits up to which they can spend. This has been 
recommended by the PAC. We also consulted the CAG and we brought it so that 
Departments will have greater flexibility in spending more rather than for small 
amounts coming and seeking appropriatio n from the Supplementary Demands. So, 
that has given more facility, more freedom  for the Departments to spend when they 
have an issue of a priority spending area. This is the fourth time since independence 
that such a review has been  undertaken and we have br ought it in this year in 
 2024-25.  
Similarly, one other major reform that we have brought in was that short-term 
T-Bill borrowings have been drastically reduced. This has contributed for greater 
liquidity in the markets and financial system  so that private borrowers do not suffer. 
The Government does not get into the mark et and crowd them out. That situation 
shall not occur because we have now chos en to have short-term T-Bill borrowings 
drastically cut down. We also did a buyb ack of G-Sec for about Rs. 88,000 crores. 
This one single step has resulted in inte rest saving of about Rs. 5,000 crores, apart 
from infusing liquidity in the system. So, other than what we do through the schemes, 
other than what we give through devolution, for managing the taxpayers’ rupee far 
more efficiently, these are the steps that we  have taken and repeatedly proving to the 
taxpayer that paying the tax truly is going fo r nation building. So, we have also, in the 
112
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
July Budget, shown very clearly that we w ill have a debt consolidation pathway, and 
that pathway will enable our Government de bt to be brought down closer to 50 per 
cent of our GDP from n early 58 per cent, where it is no w 50 per cent plus minus 1 per 
cent, by 31st March, 2031. That has been ex plained in the Budget document of last 
July Budget.  
Sir, again, if that is the trend throug h the Budget-making and the effective use 
of taxpayers' money, questions were raised if the fiscal consolidation has been at the 
cost of spending. I think, in the brief opening remarks itself, I explained how there has 
not been any reduction in the money being given to the social sector. It actually 
balances available money wherever it is available effectively, and that is not cut down. 
But if questions are being put about that we are giving lesser now, whereas the 
project demands more, I broadly highlight th e fact that the cost technology is now 
available for both the Centre and the Stat es. You can see where the money is lying 
unutilised. And, if that money is utilised, bills are raised, we shall immediately fund the 
money to the States. Now, whether it is lying in the treasury, whether it is lying in the 
SNA account, which is for a particular sc heme, money is lying and big amounts are 
lying in various big schemes across States. I am not pointing out for one State or 
another State or a third State, but money is  lying there. It is the money given, and 
many times borrowed money. If it is lying there, am I expected to borrow more money 
and put it in there and keep in the interest or is it better that you use the money and, 
p o s t  t h a t ,  I  c a n  b o r r o w  t i m e l y  a n d  g i v e  i t  t o  y o u ?   O r ,  i f  I  h a v e  t h e  c o m f o r t  o f  m y  
revenue, I can even give it. But that which is lying ‘unutilized’ today is available for the 
Governments wherever they are, State or the Centre, to see and to use it much 
before demands are made for additional re sources. I wouldn't get into reading how 
much is lying where. It is part of the Budg et set of documents. You can see it in the 
Budget document which is available and it is in the ‘Annexure Statement 4AA.’ So any 
hon. Member can see where in which Scheme , the money is lying within their State 
and use it far more effectively; and that wo uld only make efficiency far more for the 
taxpayers’ money. 
Sir, I have already said about the mone y which is going to the Schemes. So I 
wouldn't take more of the House's time. About growth challenges, I understand two 
hon. Members have spoken about it. I thin k Sulata Deoji from BJD and also hon. 
Member, Kapil Sibalji, spoke about it. It is a matter of fact, as I said earlier, that there 
are challenges. There is no doubt about the challenges that not just India but every 
country is facing. For India, in particular, to explain why the Quarter Four growth was 
low and why we think it is manageable in the forthcoming quarters is because of the 
adverse weather conditions which prevailed during the year. Excess rainfall in some 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
113

 
States, drought in some others, and also due to model Code of Conduct because of 
the Lok Sabha elections, most Departments could not spend their money in time. As 
a result, the multiplier was not as much as  you would calculate when you spend on 
your capital expenditure.  
Sir, the former Finance Minister, Shri P. Chidambaram, has raised quite a few 
issues and I have answers for all of them, answers based on data. I understand he 
has also communicated with me through a letter that he is unfortunately not going to 
be in the House today for unavoidable r easons and I appreciate him communicating, 
saying that ‘he is not going to be in the House.’ But, nevertheless, because they are 
very important points, I will try to give answers for them. Talking of unemployment ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): वैसे यह आपकी उदारता है। संसदीय परÇपराओं मȂ यह है 
िक जो बोल कर चले जाएं और उपिÎथत न हȗ, तो उनका जवाब देना आवÌयक नहीं होता है। 
अगर आप उदारतापूवर्क जवाब दे रही हȅ, तो धन्
 यवाद।  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Because उन्हȗने मुझे information भी दी थी।   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, मंतर्ी जी को जानकारी दी थी।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): जी, धन्यवाद। ठीक है।
 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : I have conceded that. Sir, he had asked a 
question saying, the PLFS data has b een released. The PLFS has said that 
unemployment rate is 3.2 per cent. The same PLFS says, youth unemployment is 
10.2 per cent, and the same PLFS says, unemployment among graduates is 13 per 
cent. So his question was:  Then how does PLFS conclude that unemployment rate is 
3.2 per cent? I have a bit of a discomfort, Si r, in that. It will be untypical of me to 
answer the way I am answering it but I will do it with due deference. The blunt point 
is, there are subsets and the lot are different lots. They don't sum up to become the 
average which will have to be somethin g else. You are comparing apples with 
oranges and then clubbing all the three and say, ‘How come it is 3.2 per cent!’ The 
former Finance Minister, I am sure, -- and I wa nt to say this on record -- is aware of 
it, but he still threw that question at me. Wit h due respects, I want to tell him that 3.2 
is the overall unemployment rate for the entire population, whereas when you are 
talking of youth, it is a subset within whic h they are calculating th e total. We need to 
improve in each one of them; there is no do ubt about that. But to think that these did 
not add up to give a mean average is wron g. They are different sets. So, I leave it 
114
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
there. I would think, ‘Oh! I am surprise d to hear that from  the former Finance 
Minister.’  I am not saying that, but yes, it surprises me.          
 Sir, he also raised a question. What is the difference between the new 
employment generation scheme and the PM Employment Generation scheme, that is, 
PMEGP? Again, they are definitely diff erent. Why are they different? The new 
Employment Generation Scheme, which was announced in the July Budget, had 
three different schemes within it. There is one which will take care of first-time job 
seekers. There is a particular scheme, a particular provision, which has been given for 
them. It says that the first-time job seeker would be given a certain amount the 
moment he is taken in, and so on. There is scheme ‘B’ within that set of three, which 
is job creation in manufacturing, where we incentivize for the employer additional 
employment that he will bring either of a first-timer, or of somebody who is moving 
from one job to another. So this is linked to employment, and first-time employees 
are given that kind of attention much more.  An incentive will be provided at specified 
scale directly to both the employee and th e employer through the EPFO route. So, it 
is registered, it is transparent, everyone can see how much is going to which 
employer and for which employee that he br ought in additionally. And, that scheme 
will last for four years.  So, for four year s, if the same employee continues with the 
new employing company and the employer, the incentive keeps flowing. So, that is 
the second one. And the third one is to  support employers where all additional 
employment within a salary limit of one lakh rupees per month will be counted and the 
Government will reimburse employers up to  3,000 rupees per month for two years 
towards their EPFO contribution for ea ch additional employee. So, the new 
Employment Generation Sche me had these three distinct employment generating 
schemes, whereas the PM Employment Gene ration Program, PMEG P, is one of the 
flagship programs of the Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises, MSME. It assists 
prospective entrepreneurs in setting up new micro enterprises, particularly in the non-
farm sector, for generating employment by  providing margin money and subsidy to 
the bank loan. So, the character, the natu re, the purpose and the method of PMEGP 
is this and, in the PM's new scheme of employment, there are three distinct 
components. So, as a basket, the three distinct components versus the PM 
Employment Guarantee Programme are totally two different things. So, the difference 
between the two is what came as a question. This is what I would like to give us as 
the answer. 
Sir, there was also this question about high inflation, food inflation, which was 
asked by several Members, former Finance Minister and others who joined in. Now, 
as per the data released yesterday, the CP I inflation for January ’25 fell to 4.31 per 
cent from 5.22 per cent. This is now closer to the lower end of RBI's inflation target, 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
115

 
which is in the range of 4 per cent; so, th e steep correction, particularly in tomato, 
onion, and potato prices, the three key components in the CPI food basket. And 
additionally, there is a decline in pulses in flation supported by tariff-free imports. For 
the pulses that we don't produce adequately  for our consumption, we import, but we 
made a conscious policy of removing the tariff when the import comes in so that we 
don't add to the price of the landed pu lses. So, as per the RBI's report on 7 th 
February, CPI inflation for 2025-26 is projected to be lower, at 4.2 per cent only. 
 So, food inflation gets triggered when you have an adverse weather condition.  
Supply chain disruptions are being managed by a Group of Ministers, who is ensuring 
that timely import happens if there is a shortfall in the supply. So, as a result, I think, 
with advanced estimates on agricultural  production 2024-25 being what it is, 
foodgrain production is expected to be at 5.7 per cent. So, the production of rice and 
toor dal is expected to increase by 5.9 per cent and 2.5 per cent respectively 
compared to 2023-24. So, the pr ices of food will be well und er the inflation radar as 
per the advanced estimates which we are getting. But despite that, the Group of 
Ministers will be monitoring it. So, what did this Budget do, the current Budget, 
which is waiting for clearance? In 100 districts,  where agricultural productivity is really 
low, we have come up with a scheme called PM Dhan Dhanya Krishi Yojana so that 
agri-activities are given impetus, producti vity is increased and more produce come 
into the market. Many other things are also added in it. There will be Atma Nirbharta 
for pulses as we grow as much and all va riety of pulses that we consume in this 
country. Then there is a comprehensive programme for vegetables and fruits so that 
supply remains abundant. A National Mission for High-Yielding Seeds is also brought 
in so that production of hi gh-yielding seeds will result in  greater agricultural produce 
in the market. I have expanded and explained about how Government attempts to get 
subsidised dal, subsidised rice, subsidised atta into th e market in the name of Bharat 
Chana Dal, Bharat Atta, etc. I just want to say how much is already sold in the market 
and how that selling is going to help becau se if you look between the Phase-1 and 
Phase-2, 13.8 lakh tonnes of Bharat Chana Da l, 16.0 lakh tonnes of Bharat Atta, 15.3 
lakh tonnes of rice are already sold; so do es chana whole, moong dal and so on. So, 
it is clear that Government’s attempt to remove the stress of price rise is actually 
being received in the ground.  The efforts w ill continue. We shall make sure that price 
would not be a burden on the ordinary citize ns. We shall support this subsidised atta, 
wheat and rice and channa dal and so on . As far as inflation management is 
concerned, I think, we have made sure that  we are addressing the problem. I am not 
getting into a comparison game because by now it is very clear who manages inflation 
a lot more in time and who does not. The depreciation of the rupee was also 
something which very many Members spoke about. I want to spend a minute on it. 
116
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Many of the Members are still here who have  been talking about it. The value of the 
Indian rupee is influenced by several factors and I am sure hon. Members know about 
it. Those factors are the movement of the dollars, the index of the dollar, trends in 
capital flows, level of interest rates, movement in crude prices, Current Account 
Deficit and so on. Quarter four of 2024 certa inly witnessed extensive currency-related 
volatility across major countries, not just In dia. So, Indian rupee, like other Asian 
currencies, depreciated against the US dollar on account of uncertainty pervading the 
global macro economy. US dollar index rose  to 6.5 per cent du ring October 21, 2024 
to January 27, 2025.  
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Major Asian currencies such as the Ko rean won, Indonesian rupiah and 
Malaysian ringgit depreciated by 8.1 per cent, 6.4 per cent and 5.9 per cent 
respectively.  G-10 currencies also depreciat ed during this period by more than 5.5 
per cent.  For instance, the Japanese yen, British pound and euro depreciated by 7.0 
per cent, 6.6 per cent and 5.8 per cent respective ly.                       
So, we believe overvalued currencies er ode national competitiveness as exports 
become expensive and domestic companie s will have to be given support. So, I 
would like to allay the concerns or apprehen sions of the hon. Members on account of 
INR fluctuation. The Government and the RBI will continue to exercise necessary vigil.  
The RBI's efforts in making sure that the Indian rupee is stabilised are several.  I would 
not want to take the time of the House on it, but these are details which I lay on the 
Table.  Any hon. Member, who wants to see it, can go into the details of how the RBI 
is constantly keeping a watch on the volatility of Indian Rupee.  
There was an interesting question rais ed by the former Finance Minister 
regarding reduction of External Affairs budget. In fact, he started his debate 
participation by talking about that at the outset. It made me feel why he would want to 
start talking on the External Affairs rath er than talking about many other Finance 
Ministry related specifics.  But he wanted to ask about the reduction on External 
Affairs budget.  “Are we reducing India's global presence? ”, was his question. I was 
a bit surprised by this. The total expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs in 2023-
2024 was about Rs.28,914 crores. It includ ed Rs.8,193 crores for payment to the 
Exim Bank.  And why would it include paymen t to the Exim Bank!  It is because the 
Exim Bank was almost compelled towards invoking guarantees against doubtful 
debts.  The Exim Bank supports a lot of ac tivity overseas, and in  the instance of the 
payments not coming in time, they will have to invoke guarantee.  So, that guarantee 
being invoked by Exim Bank will have to  be filled up by th e Government and, 
therefore, Rs.8,193 crore was given in th e year 2023-2024. That thankfully did not 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
117

 
have to be given again.  So, to that ex tent, the amount has co me down. That does 
not mean, the External Affairs budget has co me down, but that unique situation, not 
very fortunate but a unique situation, wh ich arose where guarantees being invoked 
had to be supported because of bad debts ou tside, or, it could be a line of credit 
given to some country which is in distress, or some other issue, that does not get 
repeated.  So, to that extent, this year's allocation to the Ministry of External Affairs 
does not include that amount. So, the 2024-2025 External Affairs Budget is about 
Rs.25,277 crores, which also includes Rs.4 ,383 crore for payment to the Exim Bank 
towards guarantees invoked against doubtf ul debts. In 2023-2024, we had it; in 
2024-2025, we had it, but the year 2024-2025 had half of wh at was given earlier. In 
place of Rs.8,100 crore, it was Rs.4,300 crore.  As a result, if the amount provided for 
payment to the Exim Bank towards guaran tees invoked against doubtful debt is 
excluded, the core expenditure or budget ary provision of the MEA in 2023-2024 and 
R.E. 2024-2025 is Rs.20,721 crore and Rs.20, 984 crore respectively.  So, there is no 
reduction for the MEA.  And, just as a matte r of detail, the total amount received from 
the Government of India during 2022-2023 to 2023-2024 was aggregated, as I said, to 
Rs.8,191 crore. Of the above Rs.8,000 odd crores, an amount aggregating to 
Rs.7,160 crore, that is 87 per cent of it, pertains to the LOCs extended prior to May 
2014.  You had extended it at that time.  Si r, you are a Hindi scholar. I do not want to 
risk my Hindi.  We are bhukt bhogi of what happened prior to May, 2014.  
  Many hon. Members raised the question  about food subsid y. The provision 
made under food subsidy 2025-26 is realisti c and it factors into the reduced cost on 
account of the gains accruing from equity in fusion made by the Government of India 
for Food Corporation of India.  An amount of Rs. 11,000 crores was infused into the 
FCI in 2023-24.  The provision reflects that and rationalizes to that extent. So, this has 
helped actually in reduced short-term borrowing. This has to be kept in mind.  So, 
the infusion has helped.   
With regard to fertilizers subsidy, in 2024 -25, Rs. 1.64 lakh crores was given.  
It has been increased to Rs. 1.68 lakh crore for 2025-26.  So, we have not reduced it. 
No!  Let us also recall that in the purvanchal area, three urea fact ories, which were 
lying idle, have been revived under the Purvodaya scheme, a big scheme which the 
hon. Prime Minister believes in and wants to  revive the eastern region.These three of 
them are in the eastern region. Now, to add further, this Budget has restored Namrup 
in Assam so that 12.7 lakh metric tons of urea can be produced. It can also add to the 
urea availability and reduction in the import s. So, these are steps taken one-by-one 
with a conscious attempt to make sure th at the eastern region  can grow and grow 
well. 
118
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Sir, I am not sure if these questions, which have been raised by many hon. 
Members have not been answered with fa cts earlier. Maybe they were answered 
earlier, but I would like to just highlight some of the issues. Many questions have been 
repeatedly asked, like, is it a Bihar Bonanza Budget, is it a Budget only for one State, 
and does it mean that no other State gets  anything, and I have been answering these 
questions. So, I just want to highlight some points. There has also been the allegation 
that we have not consulted the States before making this Budget. It is not true at all, 
Sir. Every year, before the Budget is ma de, all Finance Ministers from the States 
spend a whole day talking about what are th e State's priorities. We listen to them 
patiently and also include them in our Budget-making process. I have already 
expanded on the point that 1. 5 lakh crore of rupees is the amount that we have now 
made provision for the capital assets for States.   
With regard to regional imbalances and infrastructure gaps, PM Gati Shakti 
actually tells you about the gaps in the infrastructure programmes. As a result, we are 
able to fund them better, and, accordin gly, the regional imbalances are being 
addressed.  Sir, I have already said that  Rs. 25.01 lakh crores is what is being 
projected to be given in the year 2025-26. So , allegations that the Budget is for Bihar 
or only the BJP-ruled States are just unfounded. I want to dispel this thought from the 
minds of hon. Members.  I will give you the details. 
Let us first take the example of Punjab . Shri Nitin Gadkari has informed the 
Rajya Sabha in December, 2024 that 38 National Highway projects were sanctioned in 
the last three years in Punjab for the development of 825 kilometers of roads, 
amounting to Rs. 22,160 crore. It is on ly for Punjab. As far as Telangana is 
concerned, Kakatiya Mega Textile Park in Warangal was announced as PM Mitra 
Mega Textile Park. In August 2024, the Unio n Cabinet approved industrial node in 
Zahirabad under the National Industrial Corridor Development Program. These are the 
two major big ticket items being done for Telangana.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, in 
Jharkhand, Sir,… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  Please.  …(Interruptions)… Renuka ji, please sit 
down.  It is not going on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Renuka ji, please. It is not 
permitted.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, let us hear the hon. Member.   
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please continue.  …(Interruptions)… Ãलीज़, 
Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... बीच मȂ िबना चेयर की अनुमित क े न बोलȂ, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
      
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
119

 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  What is that question, Sir?  I am quite willing to 
answer. Let me hear it, Sir.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana):  Nothing has been given as yet.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  It is related to the Reorganisation Act compensation.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, on the AP Reorganization Act and what has 
been given to Telangana, as much as  I am sure, the other side of the AP 
Reorganization Act will immediately get up and ask, “What have you given to us ”? I 
am willing to answer every question on that.  As to what has been given, in particular 
for Telangana, in the AP Reorganization Act, I am willing to spend a few minutes on it.  
I would probably now, or a bit later mention, and probably I will say this one line at the 
beginning, whether it is this party or that party, it doesn't matter. I am talking on 
behalf of the State Telangana, people of Tela ngana, as much as all of us want to talk. 
At the time of reorganization, post the Re organization Act getting passed, Telangana 
was revenue surplus. Today, I am sorry to sa y –I am not picking on any one State; 
every State has its issues -- that Telangana is in debt, despite the measures taken by 
the Central Government. I will read this out, and I am not blaming this party or that 
party, I repeat.  But AP Reorganization Act, and to that extent what Telangana should 
get, I will say point by point, some of which I will say with your permission, Sir. I 
mentioned about Kakatiya Mega  Textile Park, Zaheerabad as a corridor nodal point.  
Then, Sammakka Sarakka Central Tribal Univ ersity, is a part of the Reorganization 
Act. The foundation stone also has been laid  for AIIMS in Bibinagar Nagar, close to 
Warangal. On roadways, 2,605 kilometers of  national highway has been constructed 
in Telangana since 2014, after the AP Reor ganization Act. Four greenfield corridors 
are being built under Bharatmala project in Telangana.  About railw ays, record railway 
budget allocation of Rs. 5,337 crores has been made. Since June 2024, Union 
Cabinet approved new lines between Errupalem and Namburu, and between 
Malkangiri and Pandurangapuram. Aro und 753 km of new tracks have been 
constructed in Telangana since 2014. Five Va nde Bharat trains have been introduced 
and started from Telangana. ...(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please listen.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Forty railway stations are being redeveloped for 
Telangana.  On Social infrastructure, ov er 2 lakh houses have been built and 
completed under PM Awas Yoajna - Urban.  Around 31 lakh household toilets have 
120
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
been constructed under Swachh Bharat  Mission. Around 38 lakh tap water 
connections have been provided under Jal Jeevan Mission in Telangana. 82 lakh 
Ayushman cards have been provided. 199 Jan Aushadhi Kendras have been 
operationalized.  Around 1.2 lakh Jan Dhan accounts have been opened. Over 75 lakh 
Mudra accounts have been sanctioned. …(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Let the hon. Finance Minister conclude her speech. 
..(Interruptions).. No, please. It is not an open discussion .  …(Interruptions)...  
Reddy saheb, please take your seat. You are a very senior Member.  
...(Interruptions)... She has replied in detail.  ...(Interruptions)... बहुत िवÎतार से 
माननीया फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर ने जवाब िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... No further discussion. 
...(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Let her speak.  िसफर् आपकी ही बात िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी।  आप 
बोिलए। 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I have added one more.   …(Interruptions )…  
I would like to add one more. As per the AP  Reorganisation Act, for nine backward 
districts of Telangana, we have provided Rs.50 crore for each district which is Rs.450 
crore in six installments. We have provided  Rs. 2,700 crore for the Backward District 
Development for nine districts.  All are in Telangana.   …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Let the hon. Finance Minister continue.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, Dr. Laxman from Telangana is right in 
saying that. I forgot it. Shrimati In dira Gandhi had contested from Medak 
constituency.  She won from Medak. She represented that constituency.  But who 
has given the first railway station for Medak? Prime Minister Modi.  …( Interruptions)…  
Sir, Telangana throbs for Ramagundam. It is  very important.  Who has helped revive 
that Ramagundam for Telangana?  Prime Minister Modi.   …( Interruptions)…  Si
 r, the 
capacity of Ramagundam after its revi val is 12.7 lakh metric tonne.  …( Interruptions)…  
This is for record.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. …( Interruptions)… No.  
…(Interruptions)…  She has replied in detail.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY: Sir, …(Interruptions)… 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
121

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I am not allowing  you, Madam.  You are a very senior 
Member.  …( Interruptions)…  Please take your seat.  …( Interruptions)…  No.  
…(Interruptions)…  आप सभी बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAM AN:  Sir, no State has been ignored under Prime 
Minister Modi.   …( Interruptions) …   N o  p o i n t  g e t t i n g  a n g r y ,  S i r .   … (Interruptions)…  
The point was raised.  The point was answered. …( Interruptions)…  Do you want 
more? Sir, the point is…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats. …( Interruptions)…  Renuka ji, 
please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  आपस मȂ बात नहीं करȂ, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, actually, I kept reading only some of the 
main things. But more for the sentiment of Telangana…( Interruptions)…  Like 
Ramagundam, like Sa mmakka Sarrakka. …( Interruptions)…  These are very big 
sentimental and right points for Telangana.   One other right point for Telangana, I 
missed out.  For that, Sir, I seek your indulgence.  Turmeric wh ich is produced in 
Telangana is one of the classi est turmeric.  Very good quality turmeric is produced in 
Telangana.  Who gave the Turmeric Board located in Nizamabad?  Prime Minister 
Modi.  …( Interruptions)…  With due respect to the hon. Member who is feeling so 
charged for Telangana, we are here  equally charged for Telangana.  
…(Interruptions) …   B u t  w e  s h o w  i t  t h r o u g h  o u r  actions and not by just raising 
questions.  For every question that is asked  -- because it is an emotional issue -- we 
are responding by action rather than ke ep raising the issue. We are showing it 
through our action.   
Sir, for Jharkhand, in October 2023, th e Union Cabinet sanctioned the North 
Koel Reservoir Project at a revised cost esti mate of Rs. 2,430.76 crore.  And that is 
for Jharkhand.  This Budget is not for Bihar.   This Budget is not only for BJP States.  
Every State is getting its right due. There is  nothing that I am saying. we are giving.  
No!  States deserve to get it.  They will get it.    And they are getting it.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
5.00 P.M. 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Rajeevji, please take your seat. ...( Interruptions)... 
माननीया रेणुका जी, क ृपया आप अपनी सीट पर बैठȂ।  आपस मȂ बात नहीं करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
122
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
आप सबकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Renukaji, please take your 
seat.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I would like to respond to one of the points 
which the former Finance Minister raised. It  was also raised by hon. Member, Shri 
Tiruchi Siva; also raised by hon. Member, Shri Saket Gokhale; and also raised by Shri 
Raghunadha Reddy from Andhra Pradesh,  saying, ‘You have given a certain 
projection for direct tax collection, but having foregone Rs. 1 lakh crore in the name of 
the tax relief that we have given to persons wi th income up to Rs. 12 lakh, how is that 
number right?’ This is a question which ha s been asked and I think it is a very 
important question for which answer should be  given. It is not a mistake or we have 
not deliberately just put a number. I will explain how mind has been applied and the 
Department of Revenue has rea lly looked into the details an d only then come up with 
a number. In the last five years, our Bu dget Estimates have been commented upon 
by many observers who say, “Yours is a very conservative estimate.” Even for them, I 
had just said then and now that ours is not conservative, it is realistic. We do not 
overestimate; we are realistic. So, even this year, when we have given the number for 
revenue buoyancy, the number is rea listic and I will tell you why. ...( Interruptions)... 
No, no; I will tell you.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Dr. John Brittas, no comment please! ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: We will answer it. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seat. ...( Interruptions)... Nothing is 
going on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, ‘Taxes on Income’ is a broad category. It 
includes individuals and taxpaying entities  other than companie s under the Income 
Tax Act of 1961. So, it also includes securities transaction tax. But, in the BE of 2025-
26, in ‘Taxes on Income’, if you exclude security transaction tax, it is estimated to add 
Rs. 13.60 lakh crore. This represents a growth of 13.1 per cent over 2024-25 RE, 
which implies a buoyancy of 1.30. If you were  to look at the buoyancy, this buoyancy 
is lower than the average buoyancy of 1.74 which is obtained in the last five years, 
which ends in 2023-24. If I were to take the last five years ending 2023-24, the 
buoyancy was 1.74. What we are now saying for this year is 1.30. If I were to look at 
not five years past, but only three year s past, the buoyancy was 1.94. So, three 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
123

 
years’ average is 1.94; five years’ average is 1.74; but, what we are giving now is only 
1.30. So, there is no way in which we have  done any calculation error. Therefore, 
even as I explained, that misunderstandi ng which hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas, 
would have in his mind, for instance, the ef fective tax rate across different categories 
of taxpayers for the year 2022-23, is as follo ws. Effective tax rate for individuals was 
12.2 per cent. Then comes ‘Corporation Tax on Companies’. And when I say 2022-
23, it was three years after the 2019 reduction of corporate tax.  
Then, on Corporate tax on companies, the effective tax rate was still 23.2 per 
cent, which is higher than the individual ta x rate. The effective ta x rate on companies 
is 23.2 per cent. Together with this explanation on the tax, I also want to pick up on 
this one comment which the former Finance Minister made. He said, ‘How can the 
net tax to Centre grow by 11.1 per cent when Government has given one lakh crore of 
tax concession.’ The same point was mentioned in a different way. He also said, ‘It is 
pure magic not mathematics.’ I am sorry; it is pure  mathematics. It is pure 
mathematics that we have done what we have done, and I will say why we have done 
that. The net tax revenue of the Centre is derived after deducting tax devolution to 
States from the gross tax revenue. The gross tax revenue  for the year 2025-26, the 
Budget Estimate, is estimated to grow by 10.8 per cent . So, the tax devolution to 
States in the RE of 2024-25, the year in wh ich we are still on, includes an additional 
tax devolution from the Union Government  to the States, which is one time tax 
devolution of Rs. 12,764 crores on account  of prior period adjustments which are 
required to be done.  If this adjustment amount is excluded, then, the tax devolution 
to the States in the year 2025-26, the forthcoming year, is  11.5 per cent higher than 
the RE of 2024-25.   What the net tax to  Centre will be, meaning what that amount 
which Centre will be retaining for itself is only 10.4 per cent will be. The estimation, net 
tax to Centre, is both realistic and also it factors the interest  of our States. I would 
want to inform the former Finance Minister that it is not magic, it is pure mathematics. 
I have explained about these buoyancies.  
There was this question about tax cuts benefit, not only the middle class but 
also the rich. Again, former Finance Minister said, ‘Oh! You have not just done for 
middle class, it is going to benefit even the rich.’ And, that is a point on which hon. 
Member, Dr. John Brittas will also be keen  to know, have I favoured the rich?  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): My point was… …(Interruptions)… 
 
124
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. …(Interruptions)…  Please, you have already raised 
your points. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, she is yielding. …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, put your question!  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, she projected an amount on corporate tax. She got Rs. 
40,000 crores less, whereas she is projecting 14.8 per cent growth in personal income 
tax despite giving a give-away of Rs. 1 lakh  crore.  That was the question which was 
raised. Even then, now, for 2025-26, her growth rate in Corporate and GST is hardly 
10 per cent. How is it? That was the question.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I thought I have answer ed one part of his 
question, and I will further answer through th is response on the point that the former 
Finance Minister raised. He said, ‘Therefore , your claim that you are only benefiting 
the middle class is not really completely co rrect because the measures that you have 
taken are going to benefit the rich also.’ I am sorry; he is wrong. Tax rates for different 
bands of income have also been reduced whic h is a truth. But what does it benefit? 
And, by how much does it benefit the mi ddle class as supposed to by how much it 
does benefit the higher income groups; I will  just give you a figure. We are all aware 
that in this Budget, we have said that up to  Rs.12 lakh, ‘nil’ tax, which is 100 per cent 
relief for those earning Rs.12 lakh or less. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No intervention, please. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  This is for the middle class, up to Rs. 12 lakhs, 
which was already mentioned, but I will tell  you later. In the proposed new regime, 
suppose the taxable income is Rs.24 lakhs,  total income tax in the proposed new 
income tax for that group will be Rs.3 lakhs. The relief in  comparison to the present 
regime is only Rs.1,10,000, which is 26.82 per cent, meaning assessee will be paying 
26.82 per cent lesser than the tax that he had paid earlier. On that note, in that way, I 
will explain what happens for Rs.50 lakh. Sir, the assessee will be paying 9.24 per 
cent lesser.  The new tax regime coming in  will make somebody who is earning Rs.50 
lakh to pay only 9.24 lesser than what he was paying earlier. What if he is earning Rs.1 
crore?  He will pay only 4.08 per cent lesser than what he has paid . If he is earning 
Rs.100 crore, 0.037 per cent on ly lesser than what he was paying earlier; if he is 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
125

 
earning Rs.250 crore, 0.015 per cent only lesse r than what he was paying earlier; if it 
is Rs.500 crores, he pays 0.007 per cent only  lesser than what he is paying now. So 
have we benefited the rich or is it for the middle class? Hundred per cent lesser you 
are paying, meaning you pay no tax, is be tter than 0.007 per cent lesser than what 
you were paying earlier. …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Guptaji, please. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: That is a good question. …(Interruptions)… Sir, I 
am responding and I am not skirting any is sue. The question which is coming in the 
mind of the hon. Minister is, the way in which questions are being asked on this, he is 
right, it makes us feel that they probab ly are against these tax benefits which are 
being given to the middle class.  …(Interruptions)… I think they should  say it that they 
are opposed to this. …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t ,  G u p t aji. …(Interruptions)… Mr. 
John Brittas, not allowed. …(Interruptions)… Mr. John Brittas, please take your seat. 
…(Interruptions)… Nothing is going on record. …(Interruptions)…  िसफर् Finance 
Minister की बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : No cuts have been made. …(Interruptions)… I 
yielded.  I gave an answer, you will never be happy. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : She has already yielded. …(Interruptions)… Please
, no 
more questions …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, no cut has been made in capital allocation, 
which has been explained repeatedly. But I was again surprised to hear from the 
former Finance Minister saying “Fiscal deficit has been achieved by cutting capital 
expenditure. CapEx has been cut by Rs.1.8 lakh crore. Thus, she saved on the fiscal 
target by Rs.43,785 crore. Is it a good policy? I don't know. Is it a good economy? I 
say no.” And left it there saying “You have managed to have fiscal deficit contained 
because you cut down on your capital expenditure. ” I have repeatedly said, capital 
expenditure has not been cut down. Actually, the total effective capital expenditure is 
proposed to be Rs.15.48 lakh crore, whic h is 4.3 per cent of our GDP. So Rs.11.11 
lakh crore of the vote on account Budget  and July Budget has now gone up to 
Rs.11.21 lakh crore, which is 3.1 per cent of our GDP for capital expenditure. So 
126
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
where have I cut down? I have not. It is a good augury that the former Finance 
Minister has really appreciated and realized the importance of the capital expenditure. 
And so, at least, I am glad that he real izes that capital expenditure has greater 
multiplier and it is good for the economy, it  is necessary to undertake it.  And, his 
concern that are we cutting down, is well a ppreciated and I want to assure, ‘No, we 
are not cutting down.’  But, that concern may be well worth for him to counsel some 
of his own party-ruled States, whether it is  Karnataka, whether it is Telangana, to 
spend on capital expenditure. Please tell them also. But their capital expenditure 
moneys are coming down. Congress-ruled States are no longer spending their own 
money on capital expenditure.  We are giving. We will continue to give. So, former 
Finance Minister, may I request him, in his absence, that he should counsel 
Congress-ruled states to also spend on capital expenditure. I do not want to get into 
data to say during UPA this is what happene d but one data is very  important.  Under 
the UPA, capital expenditur e as percent of total expenditure excluding interest 
payments became half, meaning, it was halved  from 31 per cent. In 2004, when Atal 
Bihari Vajpayee ji l e f t ,  i t  w a s  3 1  p e r  c e n t .  I t  w a s  b r o u g h t  d o w n  t o  1 6  p e r  c e n t  w h e n  
UPA left in 2014.  Where is 31 per cent capit al expenditure, Sir, and where is 16 per 
cent?  Appreciating capital expenditure at least, देर आयद, दुरुÎत आयद।  Sir, also the 
former Finance Minister said, “The Chief Economic Adviso r says, ‘get out of the 
way’.”  And in response, the Finance Minister in the Budget announces seven new 
schemes, eight new missions and four ne w funds. Meaning, the Chief Economic 
Advisor has told you to get out of the wa y, whereas you are coming up with more 
schemes!  Sir, people of India have made them get out of  the Government. People of 
India have made them to get out of governance itself.  And,  more importantly, if you 
take back to 1947, Mahatma Gandhi said to the Congress Party, ‘Get out of politics.  
Disband it.  Get out is  for them, Sir.  They should di sband the party.  Gandhi said, 
‘Please, you don't need to be in politics.   Get out of politics.’   But, no, they still 
lingering in India's political domain. So, from our side, I want to say, getting out is 
something which the hon. Prime Minister ha s been repeatedly saying, ‘I don't want 
red tape.  I want red carpet for industry. I will remove ar chaic laws.’  1550 obsolete 
laws have been removed. 40,000 unnece ssary compliances have been removed.  
And, also decriminalisation has happened for 3,400 offences where people would 
have been put in jail. We ha ve removed those clauses. We are, certainly, getting out 
and the CEA reminds and tells, ‘show us many things that the Chief Economic 
Advisor is independent and does say things for all the country.’ I want the State 
Governments also to follow this route of re move archaic laws.  Get out, get out, get 
out!  I wish the former Finance Minister tells the Congress Governments to please get 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
127

 
out of the way. You don't disturb people. Th ey want to be entrepreneurs, they want 
to grow; So, Jan Vishwas Bill were brought by us. We removed the Angel Tax so that 
the start-ups can function. And, the noto rious retrospective Act which was brought 
during UPA was removed by hon. Prime Mini ster, which was a regressive Act. Yes!  
Sir, the last point before that, I have two specific responses for two Members who 
spoke much later than when I left this place. Sir, the former Finance Minister. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) :  Madam, please speak about Kerala. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please. No comments. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : There is one point whic h we can repeatedly 
remind ourselves.  I will say that.  About Kera la!  Sir, this is former finance minister 
who said, ‘There is a Government, but th ere is little governance. There is no 
philosophy, so there is no policy.’ I am  urging the former Finance Minister to 
recapture the wisdom and fast-sightedness of Dr. Manmohan Singh.  Former Finance 
Minister said this and I listened to him careful ly.  Sir, ‘philosophy’ and ‘vision’ was the 
way in which 1991 opening happened of the Indian economy.  They gave up, within six 
months, all the conditions put on India fo r opening up of the Indian economy. And, 
they just forgot reforms after that!  So, ‘v ision’ was there, but it remained only on 
paper!  And, Sir, not till Shri Atal Biha ri Vajpayee came has the momentum on getting 
reforms gained. You got your roads built for the country and rapidly changed the 
nature in which businesses are done.  They all started happening.  Sir, ten years after 
that, there was again lull for ten years!  Once we entered into office in 2014, we 
started all over again and reforms are happening.  So, ‘vision’ was there. And, 
whether under compulsion or otherwise, you opened the Indian economy.  But, it did 
not persist.  It was a brilliant Government and brilliant Budget. Right!  It made history.  
No doubt.  I don’t know this connection; but I want to put it on record.  It was from 
that Government the former Finance Minister  resigned!  I know whether he resigned 
on his own account or he was asked to go.  If that was the Government about which 
he was telling, ‘Oh! It was a brilliant Government.  It had a vision’, Sir, you resigned 
from it!  I believe, you resigned, or, you were asked to go. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: But he came back again. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
128
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Alright.  Never mind.  You can defend.  He did 
leave and then he went to three different parties. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No comments, Jairam Rameshji. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : He went to even a regional party – TMC.  He 
went to a regional party – Tamil Manila  Congress! So, such a great Government 
about which I am being told, ‘Oh! You shou ld remember. It had a vision.’ You could 
not have left that visionary Government then. You left, Sir. You left. 
...(Interruptions)...  Sir, there are two things...  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: Madam, what about Kerala? 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : I will come to Kerala, certainly. Hon. Member, 
Jaya Bachchanji, spoke passionately about how the film industry is being neglected. 
She also said, ‘Leave aside the GST. All si ngle screen theatres are shutting down. 
People are not going to movie halls.  There is  no cut in the Entertainment Tax.’ Sir, I 
just want to explain this a bit for the be nefit of all hon. Members.  There is no 
Entertainment Tax levied by the Union Go vernment. First thing is clear.  Second, 
Entertainment Tax levied, previously, by the State Governments was subsumed into 
GST.  It is correct.  Then, the Constitution still allows the State Governments to make 
laws with respect to taxes on entertainmen t and amusements to the extent levied and 
collected by the Panchayats and Municipalities.   This is under Entry No. 62, List-II of 
the Seventh Schedule. Sir, Regional Councils or the District Councils can also levy. 
So, levy of taxes on entertainment and amus ement is by the local bodies which is a 
State Subject. There is no Central jurisdicti on on it. So, there is no question of 
increasing or reducing it; none of that is with me. Before the GST, the tax on 
entertainment services averaged around 30 pe r cent.  Movie tickets attracted various 
entertainment tax, while a combined 20.5 per cent VAT and Service Tax applied on it.  
It also applied to food and beverages at theatres. Some States had Entertainment Tax 
as high as 100 per cent!  Now, the service  of food and beverages in movie theatre 
attracts a mere 5 per cent GST.  Sir, only 5 per cent GS T is levied on items in food 
stalls in theatres or now on notorious and infamous popcorn.  Sir, only 5 per cent GST 
is levied. 
  Sir, multiple GST Council meetings have discussed -- I can give you the dates - 19th 
May, 2017, 11th June, 2017, 22 December,  2018 -- for reducing GST on movie 
tickets. In 2018, a decision was taken th at on tickets costing Rupee 100 or above 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
129

 
Rupees 100, only 18 per cent GST will be charged.  Earlier, it  was 28 per cent. For 
movie tickets below 100 Rupees, only 12  per cent GST will be applied; whereas, 
earlier, it was 18 per cent. So, GST Counc il has reduced GST on movie tickets.  
Then, hon. Member Jaya Bachchan ji said, “We do not believe in just photo ops with 
film stars. We work for the development of entire media and entertainment sector, 
which includes… ”.   S h e  s a i d  s o m e  t h i n g s .  S i r ,  I  w a n t  t o  s a y ,  f o r  a l l  t h o s e ,  w e  g i v e  
respect to everybody. One of the major steps taken by this Government is that the 
Cabinet has recently approv ed the Waves 2025. India w ill host, for the first time, 
World Audiovisual Entertainment Summit, ca lled Waves, in Mumbai between 1st and 
4th of May 2025. It will bring together me dia CEOs, entertainment icons, creative 
minds from all over the globe. The Summit ai ms to position India as a global hub for 
media and entertainment, offering unpara lleled opportunities for collaboration and 
showcasing Indian talent. So, I want hon. Member Jaya Bachchan to know that we 
have not forgotten the film industry. On the contrary, we are lifting it to such a level 
where all States can display their talents, and the movie industry or, what you call, the 
audio visual capacities, which they have, can also be displayed. In September 2024, 
the Cabinet also approved establishment of  the National Centre for Excellence for 
Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming, Comics and Extended Reality. That has also been 
already cleared by the Cabinet. The Government has facilitated the signing of co-
production treaties of India with 15 differen t countries, so that co-producing of films 
will be possible. And, for facilitating sh ooting in India of films, a single-window-
clearance mechanism ha s also been created with the F ilm Facilitation Office. So, we 
have not forgotten the film industry. Also, hon. Prime Minister, in his Man Ki Baat, has 
also spoken about the 100th birth anniversar y of several iconic figures. In the last Man 
Ki Baat , he spoke about four cinematic le gends, Raj Kapoor, Mohammad Rafi, 
Akineni Nageshwar Rao and Tapan Sinha.  Th ey all have been remembered for their 
birth anniversaries and so on. So, I find it  odd that hon. Member, Jaya Bachchanji, 
has expressed her angst about how film industry has not been supported, whereas 
she will well remember hon. Member of Pa rliament today in the Lok Sabha, Ms. 
Kangana Ranaut, under the MVA Government, which her alliance supports, was 
intimidated in September 2020 at Pali Hill, Mu mbai.  In a notice of 24 hours, which 
was given to her, demolition happened. And,  till the Bombay High Court interfered, 
the demolition was happening.  Hon. Member, Jaya Bachchanji, should be talking to 
her alliance parties about how film industry is being ignored, how they are being put to 
suffering. ...(Interruptions)...  A n d ,  o f  c o u r s e ,  I  d o  n o t  n e e d  t o  g o  b a c k  t o  t a l k i n g  
about how Hridaynath Mangeshkar, the brother of Lata Mangeshkar, could not even 
work in All India Radio. He was fired b ecause he was composing and singing not to 
130
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
please the Congress party. And, also, Ma jrooh Sultanpuri was jailed in 1949. 
...(Interruptions)... And, Dev Anand was threat ened for not supporting the 
Emergency. And, Kishore Kumar was also pu lled off the air. So, about film industry, 
about film... ...(Interruptions)... Yes, I will come to that.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... No;  nothing is 
going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I will come to Kerala. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : I will come to Kerala. Hold on. 
...(Interruptions)... Jayaji also was very, very ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. ...(Interruptions)... No, no, no. Let her speak.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Jayaji was also worried about film industry. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... No, no; no 
cross-talk.  Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : You wanted on Kerala, I will come back to 
Kerala. ...(Interruptions)... Now you want something else. You can't just go on 
throwing the gauntlet like that to me. I will take each one of them and answer you. 
...(Interruptions)... No good, no good. ‘Everything is so expensive’ was a worry, 
hon. Member, Jaya Bachchanji's worry. I want to say, Sir, ‘No poor Jaya! All of you 
are poor; I am also poor. But the question s asked will have to be answered. Right? 
...(Interruptions)... But so much was said. So much was said. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Tiruchiji, let her speak.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, when the Government  is doing so much, I 
need to take time to answer. Do you want me to just normally mention one thing and 
go away? I will say everything that this Go vernment is doing because we are doing 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
131

 
that much and more. ...(Interruptions)... Sir, if 90 Members can speak and we have 
heard it all, I will not be allowed 90 minutes to answer! ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Unbelievable, Sir. You don't want ninety minutes 
of answer. I have heard 90 Members. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, she had a concern 
that people have stopped watching films. People have not stopped watching movies. 
They probably are viewing OTTs. I just want  to say how the OTT sector is booming in 
India -- Disney and Hotstar, 400 million active users; Netflix 3- plus million paid 
subscribers; and Amazon Prime Video, 4.4 million paid subscribers. According to a 
FICCI EY Report, OTT market will hit 12.5 billion US dollars by 2030, and, already, 
there are 448 million OTT viewers in India, which is second on ly to China. That is the 
growth that India in regional languages and in Hindi is having in the OTT sector. So, 
film industry will not have an issue, Sir, and the Government is quite seized of the kind 
of response. ...(Interruptions)...  
Sir I just want to make one broad reference because the hon. Member, Shri 
Raghav Chadda, is seated here. I got to know that he is a Chartered Accountant. 
Sorry, I didn’t know it earlier. I must confess. Probably, I have forgotten. Pardon for 
that. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, Dr. John Brittas.   Please.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Because, repeatedly, I don't see the strength of 
a Chartered Accountant coming in your inte rventions. So, it makes me question, ‘Am 
I really right in thinking that you are a Chartered Accountant? ...(Interruptions)... Sir, 
I want to say, ‘marginal relief.’ ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your  seat. ...(Interruptions)... No, not 
allowed. ...(Interruptions)... आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Only Finance Minsiter’s speech is going on recrd. ...(Interruptions)... No. Please. 
आप बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Hon.  Finance Minister, please speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: You s
 hould please listen and go to your Finance 
Minister in Kerala and ask this question about GST. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  
132
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, if the hon. Member has a question to clarify 
on GST, equally and more competent will be the Finance Minister of Kerala to answer. 
He should seek clarification from him. ...(Interruptions)... No, no, you have had 
doubt and I am ready to answer ; but if it is on GST, I would equally appeal to you to 
please contact your Finance Minister and as k him. Sir, about the 12 lakh rupees, I 
honestly want to request humbly the hon. Member, Raghav Chadha ji, to kindly not 
mislead the House; I don't mean he intended to do. I don't think he intended to 
mislead the House, but the way he popped up the whole detail about the personal 
income tax which has come in this Budget , 2025-26, we have i ssued FAQ. Just as 
soon as I finished my speech, the FAQ was put out. Lots of people who asked the 
questions have all been comprehensively give n explanation.  For an hon. Member to 
come to the House and say, ‘No, you will pay entirely for every rupee post your Rs. 12 
lakh salary’ is not okay. No, the marginal relief takes it further down.  You do not need 
to pay till about Rs. 12,75,000; you do not end up paying much. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Raghav Chadha, you have already spoken. 
...(Interruptions)... She has already replied. ...(Interruptions)... No, it is not going 
on record.  Please, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, for his understanding ...(Interruptions)... 
Hon. Member, Shri Raghav Chadha, kindly indulge me. I will give you figures, number 
by number. Listen to me. Sir, suppose a pe rson earns more than Rs. 12 lakhs – that 
was his core worry – say, Rs. 12,10,000, th e tax without marginal relief would have 
been Rs. 61,500, whereas with tax, marginal  relief which is given in the Budget, he 
pays only Rs. 10,000. 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab):  But, what happens to ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Now, wh at if a person ear ns Rs. 12,50,000? 
The tax without marginal relief ...(Interruptions)... Listen, please. 
...(Interruptions)... You misled the House. At least hear it now. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Raghav  Chadha, please take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)... I have not allowed you. Please take your seat. 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
133

 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, if a person earns Rs. 12,50,000, tax without 
marginal relief for him would have been Rs. 67,500.  But, with marginal relief offered, 
he will pay only Rs. 50,000.  Suppose he is  earning Rs. 12,70,000, without marginal 
relief, he would pay Rs. 70,5 00 whereas with marginal reli ef, he pays Rs. 70,000.  
And it is only when he reaches Rs. 12,75,000, that his tax will be Rs. 71,250, with or 
without marginal relief.  
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  That is exactly my point. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  All right.  That is it. Do you expect me to go on 
till Rs. 20,000? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िसफर् माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की बात िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
आप बैठ जाएँ। हर वƪ disturb न करȂ, आप बैठȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Mr. Raghav Chadha being a Chartered 
Accountant, I repeat, is only misleading rather than informing people. 
...(Interruptions)...  And it is put out openly.  There is  no hide and seek in this.  This 
is put out there. The calculation has been put out openly . And a Chartered 
Accountant keeps repeatedly saying... ...(Interruptions)... That is exactly w
 hat I am 
asking. I am saying that in writing and oral ly. What more does he want?  I have not 
hidden anything. ...(Interruptions)...  Also, Sir, I want to highlight Kerala before I go 
off to other issues.  Hon. Member here sa id, I have not said much about Kerala. On 
August, 2024, the Union Cabinet approved an industrial node in Palakkad. The 
Kannur Airport was operationalized under RCS UDAN scheme. Site clearance was 
granted for construction of a Greenfield airport at Kottayam. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़, आप बैठȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Please listen. ...(interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  One thou sand and three hundred kilometres of 
National Highway have been constructed in Kerala since 2014. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप बैठȂ। You may listen to the response to your queries about 
Kerala. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Ker ala): Sir, what about Wayanad? 
...(Interruptions)... 
134
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAM AN:  One thousand one hundred and twenty-six 
kilometres of National Highway co rridors are being developed under Bharatmala 
Pariyojana in Kerala. Sir, I would continue bu t they would say, you have not said 
anything about Kerala. The moment I star t reading the list, they would shout me 
down.  Is this fair, Sir? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िसफर् माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की बात िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
आप बैठ जाएँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Talking ab out metro, India’s first water metro, 
the Kochi Water Metro, was inaugurated by Prime Minister, Shri Modi, in April, 2023.  
Thee Kochi Metro was inaugurated by Prime Mi nister, Shri Modi, in 2017. Twenty-five 
kilometres of metro rail have been operationalized since 2014. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Br ittas, please take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  There has been a record railway budget 
allocation of Rs. 3,042 crore for Kerala.  1 25 km of new tracks have been constructed 
in Kerala since 2014. ...(Interruptions)...  Two Vande Bharat  trains have been 
started.  Thirty-five railway stations are being re-developed.  Talking about social 
infrastructure, 1.6 lakh houses have been built under the PM Awas Yojana; in 2.5 lakh 
households, toilets have been constructed under the Swachch Bharat Mission . 
...(Interruptions)... 21 lakh tap water connections  have been provided under Jal 
Jeevan Mission . Sir, 82 lakh Ayushman cards we re provided; 1,500 Jan Aushadhi 
Kendras were operationalised; 66 lakh Ja n Dhan Accounts were opened; 1.6 crore 
Mudra Accounts were sanctioned. That is for Kerala. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: John Brittas ji, please take your seat. Nothing is going on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Now, their talk about Bengal being denied its 
due share. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat, Dr. John Brittas. 
...(Interruptions)... All the Members who are standing, I request you, please take 
your seat. ...(Interruptions)...  
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
135

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Bengal denied its due share being peddled 
about and the imagined discrimination against West Bengal. ...( Interruptions)...  
Like every other State, PM Awas Yojana-G ramin (PMAY-G) is being implemented in 
West Bengal since 2016-17. The Government has released Rs.25,798 crore as Central 
share to the State since 2016-17. However,  complaints of irregularities in the 
implementation of PM Awas Yojana, includin g selection of ineligible households for 
Awas Plus 2018 list, removal of eligible households and branding violations were 
received.  Similar things have happened about MGNREGA also. The people of Bengal 
are survivors and I am sure they will get over the obstruction which has been imposed 
by the Party. But, on the specific issue wh ich was raised by Shri Saket Gokhale, the 
Union Government allocated Rs.172 crore to Andhra Pradesh, Rs.147 crore to Bihar, 
Rs.151 crore to Gujarat, Rs.200 crore to Madhya Pradesh and Rs.154 crore to Uttar 
Pradesh for tourism projects according to an official statement in Lok Sabha. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal) : Sir, I have a point of order. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will give you the point of order.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: This was raised and he also further said, ‘Not a 
single rupee was given to West Bengal. Mo reover, the Centre ha s not even included 
any tourism site from Bengal in the scheme s’. It was said during the Question Hour 
and I quote Minister Gajendra Singh Sh ekhawat's response here and this is 
emblematic of the issue between the Memb er, who thinks Bengal is not receiving 
anything and the Government. Here, we go by the facts. And what was Gajendra 
Singh Shekhawat's facts? He said, ‘We r eached out to the Government of West 
Bengal four times in writing and even sp oke personally to its representatives, 
requesting them to submit project propos als. Despite our rep eated efforts, no 
proposal was ever sent by the State. So, the Centre is not showing any step-motherly 
treatment.  It seems that West Bengal's ow n administration is failing to act’. So, I 
want Bengal also to know that there is no ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Finance Minister, he ha s a point of order. Derekji, 
what is your point of order? Under which rule are you raising it? ...(Interruptions)..  
 
136
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, it is within the rules ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Under which rule are you raising it? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: It is within the rules.  ...( Interruptions)... Let me finish. It is 
within the rules ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, with your permission, if there is no rule, I am 
going ahead. The point of objection is being raised. If there is no rule, with your 
permission, I want to go ahead. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Sir, it is Rule 239.  ...(Interruptions)... Within the rules, I was 
asking for it for the last three minutes. Now, 239 is the Rule. I just bring it to your 
notice. It says, “When, for the purposes of explanat ion during discussion or for any 
other sufficient reason, any Member has occasion to ask a question of another 
Member on any matter then under the consid eration of the Council, he shall ask the 
question through the Chairman. ” That is the rule.  Besides this rule, I have Rule 322 
on my computer, referring to a Chaiman’s ruling, ‘debate State matters’. That is a 
ruling.  Please pull out Rule 322 on your computer, and I am asking the question. I am 
reading. ‘State matters - without prior no tice, nothing should be said derogatory 
about a State Government’.  That is the rule.  ...( Interruptions)...  That is a ruling. 
...(Interruptions)... Now, I come to my question. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I will give my ruling later on. ...(Interruptions)...  
  
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Sir, on 239, my question is there. I have a pointed question to 
the Finance Minister. ...( Interruptions)... You answer me ‘yes’ or ‘no’. Rs.7,500 
crores owed to MNREGA for Bengal; 99.2 per cent compliance has been made, but 
where is the money for MNREGA and Awas Yojana? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... You have put 
your question. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Do not tell us about who gave the money ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing else is 
going on record.  Pleas e take your seat. ...(Interruptions )... There is no point of 
order. ...(Interruptions)... The Leader of the House. 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
137

 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA): Sir, nothing 
derogatory against any State Government has been said. They are trying to politicise 
the issue. They raise issues an d they try to give an impre ssion that some injustice is 
being done to a State. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा 
रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Is it a fish market?  Are they making it a fish market? 
...(Interruptions)...  They do not have even the decency to hear. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please sit down. ...( Interruptions)...  माननीय सदÎय, 
मयार्दा क े साथ एक-दूसरे से बात करȂ और सुनȂ । ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : They have only one thing to put charges. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपकी बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रह
 ी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Sir, nothin g derogatory has been said against any 
State Government. That is number one. Numb er two, they have raised issues that 
they are not getting justice in the respect ive States. The Union Finance Minister is 
answering one by one the issue how the Gove rnment of India, the Modi Government, 
has given more than justice to their States and how the Government of West Bengal is 
not responding to the fiscal laws and rules. T h a t  i s  w h a t  s h e  i s  t r y i n g  t o  s a y .   
...(Interruptions)...  Now, Sir, I would like to requ est you that there should not be 
any point of order and let the Union Finance Minister give the answer in complete.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let her speak.Noth ing else is going on record now.  
...(Interruptions)...  Yes, hon. Finance Minister.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, there were questions about how our 
Government is, probably, not doin g adequate for the MSMEs.  ...( Interruptions)...  I 
want to make it very clear that in the la st three Budgets, we have been repeatedly 
taking step after step, and in this Budg et also, many steps have been taken to 
strengthen MSMEs for accelerated growth  and enhanced remittance, enhanced 
138
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
credit limits. ...( Interruptions)...  So, micro and small en terprises have been given 
credit guarantee cover from Rs.5 crores to Rs.10 crores. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber) 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया आप अपनी-अपनी सीट पर जाएँ ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  For start-ups, the coverage has been...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय नेता सदन। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Sir, they do not have to  answer the people of West 
Bengal; they have to answer their leader, Ms. Mamata Banerjee, and that is why they 
are doing all this. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Innovative financial tools have also been brought 
in for customised credit cards, and the cr edit card offering is  about Rs.5 lakh.  
Support for the first-time entrepreneurs ha s been given. New firm loan scheme has 
been offered with up to Rs.2  crores for the first-time en trepreneurs for the next five 
years, particularly the SCs/STs and entrepreneurs who come from those 
communities. We have given leather and fo otwear industry enough support so that 
their businesses can grow and leather sect or has also has been given enhanced 
importance. Imports for wet blue leather are now fully exempt from basic Customs 
Duty so that crust leather export is fr eed from a 20 per cent duty to encourage 
domestic value addition and export.   
The National Manufacturing Mission ha s also been given funds. The EV and 
mobile production is also being increased.  The import of several of the critical 
minerals has also been enabled. So, very  clearly, the steps taken in July, 2024 
Budget are being continued even in this Budget. So, MSMEs have always received a 
very important place in our Budget-making. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): What about Tamil Nadu? 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿ
ा: सर, बचपन मȂ हम लोग देखा करते थे िक िकर्के ट क े मैच मȂ जब कोई टीम 
हारने लगती थी, तो वह िवके ट उखाड़ करके  चल देती थी। ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे अपना बचपन याद 
आ गया, जब इतनी िजÇमेदार पाटीर् ने ऐसा िकया।  हम 90 Îपीकसर् को सुनȂ, उनके  एक-एक िंबदु 
को ध्यान मȂ रखकर िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया तैयारी कर उसका जवाब दȂ और जब जवाब सुनने की 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
139

 
िहÇमत न हो, तो ये िवके ट उखाड़ करके  चल दȂ! ...(Ëयवधान)... खुद का िवके ट उखाड़ करके  
चल दȂ! सर, यह संसदीय परंपराओं क े िवरुǉ है। मȅ चाहूँगा िक इतनी पुरानी पाटीर् - वैसे  अपनी 
बुिǉमǄा क े Ģदशर्न क े कारण हर समय उनकी िगरावट बढ़ती जा रही है, लेिकन िफर भी हम 
चाहते हȅ िक वे आगे बढ़Ȃ। वे आगे बढ़ने क े िलए कम से कम इत
ना तो ध्यान रखȂ और माǈा रखȂ िक 
जब िवǄ मंतर्ी point wise जवाब  दे रही हȗ, तो वे उसको सुनȂ। यह जवाब क ेवल िवǄ मंतर्ी नहीं 
देती हȅ,this is the answer of the G
overnment being given with full responsibility. जब उस 
responsibility क े साथ वे जवाब देती हȅ, then, the Opposition should  also take it in that 
spirit. 
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, since very senior Member, Shri Tiruchi Siva 
is saying ‘What about Tamil Nadu’, I think, I should list out what is being done for the 
State of Tamil Nadu. With due respect… …(Interruptions)…  Do you want me to sit 
down?  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Tiruchi Siva ji, first, you have to take the permission of the 
Chair.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, I wish to say something important. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please be brief. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : The Tamil Nadu Government asked for two major important 
metro projects, Madurai and Coimbatore. Nothing has been said in this regard. Apart 
from this, pending dues of MNREGA and SSA have not been given and they are still 
pending with the Union Government. Also , with regard to the PMAY, the State 
Government has spent its entire share but the Union Government has not given what 
it has to.  At least, say something about these two important metro projects.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Now, hon. Finance Minister. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I wa
nted to start with something but I will reserve 
it for the end. Let us talk about Tamil Nadu. The Chennai Metr o Rail Project, Phase-
2, was announced as the ‘Central Sector’ project, costing Rs. 63,246 crores, of 
which, 65 per cent will be financed by the Central Government. The Tamil Nadu 
Defence Industrial Corridor was inaugurated in January, 2019. There have been 
different statements at different times. I wo uld like to say, subject to correction, as I 
do not keep an account of these statements, investments worth more than Rs. 
140
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
30,000 crore has already happened. This has been said by Ministers, both of the 
older dispensation and the current dispensati on. I do not have the latest number. But 
when the Defence Industrial Corridors (D ICs) were announced by Prime Minister 
Modi, the first corridor was announced for the State of Tamil Nadu. So, to think 
constantly that ‘Oh, Tamil Nadu has not got it’ is not right. The UP corridor was 
announced far later. Tamil Nadu was at the priority when it came to Defence Industrial 
Corridors. PM-MITRA Mega Textile Park was announced in the Aspirational District of 
Virudhunagar.  Foundation stone for AIIMS, Ma durai was laid in 2019.  With regard to 
Railways… …(Interruptions)… No, no. It is all right.You can always keep on moving the 
milepost.  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, please do not comment while sitting.  
Please do not speak without permission. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Now, I will have to say what I wanted to say in 
the beginning, which I reserved for the end. It cannot be a narrative where it is only 
the Centre’s fault. I want to quote two examples, and I want to quote these two 
examples with full responsibility. Sir, see the consciousness with which they point out 
every single detail, but where were they earl ier! They were alliance partners with the 
Congress at that time. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Hold on. You can’t stop me like this, I am sorry.  
...(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):  We don’t agree.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : I will say this. I am answering you.  
…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : 
&“I am answering you only. It is your duty to 
listen patiently. If you are so angry. I will give the reply in Tamil.”  S i r ,  t h e y  w e r e  
alliance partners. When Congress Implemen ted a ban on Jallikattu, where did you 
go? You were partners with that Government. Why didn't you question the Congress 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
141

 
Party about the banning of Jallikattu? Why di dn't you question why they were doing 
it? It is wrong to criticise Mr. Modi that he is always working against the interests of 
Tamil Nadu. You are always criticising him. It is wrong. Do you have the courage to sit 
patiently and listen to the reply? Sir, ther e is some Member who thinks I am saying 
things which are not related. I will say it because it was Prime Minister Modi who did 
it, despite a silent partnership and a result which was against the people of Tamil 
Nadu.  Jallikattu was banned in Tamil Nadu when they were partners with Congress. 
It was Prime Minister Modi who removed it fr om that list. Do you have the courage to 
sit patiently and listen to the reply? 
That is one example, Sir. I will say th e second example. Be patient and have 
strength in your mind.  Have a strong mind to listen to the reply and convey it there. I 
will reply with a strong mind. Please listen.  Sir, second example. You are speaking 
about the metro. I would like to explain about the metro, Sir, Chennai metro. 
...(Interruptions)… You can't tell me that I can't  say. You can speak anything you 
like. ...(Interruptions)...   They are criticising me. Ca n't I reply? I will speak. I got his 
permission to speak. You can't tell me that I can't say. I don't know whether he 
understands Tamil or not. Mr. Siva, you have raised the issue twice since this 
morning. I am watching it. Mr. Siva, you are not speaking the truth. I am sorry to say 
this. ..Please speak to Mr. Siva. ” I will say it in English, Ti ruchi Siva is a very senior 
member. I respect him. We have had a lot of exchanges about differences in 
ideology.  We have been talking. This is something which goes on. But since he 
raised the issue of metro, again I am saying, it was the decision of the State 
Government not to have the Centre do it an d it was a decision that they will do it 
themselves. This Government or that Government, I am not getting into the picture.  
Now, if the State Government has chosen to do it, it is their decision. And in a press 
conference later, when it was all charged against us saying, your Urban Development 
Ministry is not sanctioning; you were supposed to get multilateral banks loans; you 
are not giving; Modi is not doing anything for Tamil Nadu, I wish to say, I was there 
and I explained that initially the Cent ral Government said, we would get the 
multilateral assistance and support the Ch ennai Metro Project phase 2. The State 
Government, whichever the State Government  w a s ,  c h o s e  n o t  t o  h a v e  i t  f r o m  t h e  
Centre. They said, ‘No, we will do it ourselves’. All right!  
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu):  No, no, that is not correct. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Excuse me, Sir.  I am the Minister. I was in the 
discussion when your Minister s had come. I was a Minister at that time. I heard it.  
142
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Member, Wilson, please go, check it up with your own 
Government. …(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Wilson, please.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  No,  n o,  I  am  s or ry.  I  h a ve  s ai d  th i s  e ven  i n  a  
press conference in Tamil in Tamil Nadu. I am saying it in English in Rajya Sabha. We 
honoured that decision of the State Govern ment and left it and said, whenever you 
want to think about it, come back. If you want, I will get the multilateral loan.Then, 
last year, Prime Minister Modi said, we will do that for them because hon. Chief 
Minister from Tamil Nadu had come, met up  with the Prime Minister and said we 
would want you to take it and the Prime Mi nister conceded. This is on record. So, 
two instances, where the Central Government volunteered to say &"Dear Tamil 
friends, Jallikattu is yours.You can legisl ate a law in support of it. You can make 
necessary amendments. "  
 
6.00 P.M. 
 
It is in your powers to change it and say that Jallikattu will be allowed in Tamil Nadu.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Finance Minister, just one minute. Hon. Members, 
the reply to the discussion on the Union Bu dget, 2025-26 is under way.  If the House 
agrees, we may sit beyond 6.00 p.m. to conclude today’s Business. Do I have the 
leave of the House to extend the sitting beyond 6.00 p.m.?  
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, in both the instan ces, the Centre kept on 
saying that we are willing to do it. But wh en it happened, even though they were 
alliance partner with the Congress, they did not stop it. We did not hold it against 
them.  We came and explained that it is no t us; it is not Prime Minister Modi who 
halted Jallikattu.  On the contrary, we helped. Even  in the Supreme Court, we said, 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
 
 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
143

 
“It should be part of Tamil Nadu's culture.  So do it. ” That was done by us.  So was 
this one.  Metro was also done by us. …( Interruptions)… On Highways, Sir, 4,100 km 
of National Highways was constructed in Tamil Nadu since 2014. Five greenfield 
corridors being built under Bharat Mala  project in Tamil Nadu. Salem Airport 
operationalised under UDAN.  New integr ated terminal building, phase one of 
Chennai International Airport,  developed at a cost of Rs.1,260 crore. On social 
infrastructure, over 12 lakh houses built under PM Awas.  Nearly  59 lakh households 
…(Interruptions)…   Toilets constructed under Swachh Bh arat mission. Nearly 89 lakh 
tap water connections provided under Ja l Jeevan mission. Seventy-eight lakh 
Ayushman cards provided. Sir, 1,350 Jan Au shadhi Kendras were operationalised.  
1.6 crore Jan Dhan accounts opened and 5.7 crore Mudra accounts sanctioned.  
Tiruchi Airport.  Hon. Minister Dr. Murugan is also saying about it.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister, please continue.  
…(Interruptions)…  Hon. Finance Minister, is your reply complete?  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Yes, Sir.  
 
M R .  D E P U T Y  C H A I R M A N :  P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t  n o w .   …(Interruptions)… Hon. 
Members, there are 23 permitted Special Me ntions for today. Special Mentions of 
those hon. Members who are present now sha ll be deemed to have been laid on the 
Table of the house. 
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS♦ 
 
Demand for Railway Over Bridge at the Railway Crossing No.143 on Amirgarh-
Dabela-Ambaji Road in Banaskantha District 
 
 Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई (गुजरात): महोदय, मȅ बनासकांठा िजले क े 
अमीरगढ़-दबेला-अंबाजी मागर् पर िÎथत रेलवे कर्ॉिंसग संख्या 143 पर रेलवे ओवरिĤज क े बारे मȂ 
सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ।  इस मागर् पर Ģितिदन एक ला ख से भी ज्यादा वाहनȗ 
का आवागमन होता है, जो रेलवे नीित क े अनुसार रेलवे ओवर िĤज क े िनमार्ण क े िलए आवÌयक 
न्यूनतम वाहनȗ की संख्या से अिधक है। अमीरगढ़ तालुका मुख्यालय है और यहाँ सभी सरकारी 
कायार्लय, बȅक, कॉलेज आिद िÎथत हȅ। रेलवे िवभाग ǎारा िनिर्मत अंडरिĤ
ज 90 िडगर्ी कोण पर 
                                                            
♦ Laid on the Table. 
144
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
बनाया गया है, िजससे बड़े वाहन और बसȂ उसमȂ से नहीं गुजर सकतीं।  इस कारण, गुजरात 
सड़क पिरवहन िनगम, पालनपुर ने सूिचत िकया है िक बसȂ क ेवल रेलवे अंडरिĤज तक ही चलȂगी।  
इससे छातर्ȗ और आम नागिरकȗ को अत्यिधक किठनाई हो रही है। इस सन्दभर् मȂ मȅने जनवरी, 
2024 मȂ माननीय रेल मंतर्ी से मुलाकात करके  पतर् िदया था।  
महोदय, मै आपके  माध्यम से रेल मंतर्ी को बताना चाहता हूँ िक रेलवे नीित क े तहत, ऐसे 
िनमार्ण क े िलए 50 परस Ȃट Ëयय रेलवे मंतर्ालय और 50 परस Ȃट Ëयय राज्य सरकार ǎारा वहन 
िकया जाता है।  रेलवे ओवर िĤज (ROB) क े िनमार्ण क े िलए गुजरात सरकार ǎारा पहले ही 
55.48 करोड़ रुपए  की 50 परसȂट रािश Îवीकृ त की जा चुकी है।  
अतः मȅ आपके  माध्यम से रेलवे मंतर्ालय से अनुरोध करता हूँ िक अमीरग
ढ़-दबेला-अंबाजी 
मागर् पर िÎथत रेलवे कर्ॉिंसग संख्या 143 पर रेलवे ओवरिĤज िनमार्ण हेतु मंतर्ालय आवÌयक 
िवǄीय Îवीकृ ित Ģदान करने की क ृपा करे। 
 
Concern over cha
llenges arising in the weather forecasting capabilities  
due to climate change 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश):  महोदय , मȅ भारतीय मौसम िवभाग (IMD) को उसकी 
150वीं वषर्गांठ पर बधाई देती हूँ। िपछले डेढ़ सौ वषș मȂ IMD ने मौसम पूवार्नुमान, आपदा चेतावनी 
और जलवायु अध्ययन मȂ सराहनीय योगदान िदया है। लेिकन, जलवायु पिरवतर्न क े कारण मौसम 
मȂ आ रही चरम अिÎथरता क े चलते सटीक पूवार्नुमान लगाना एक बड़ी चुनौती बन गया है। बदलते 
जलवायु पैटनर् क े कारण चकर्वा
त, अचानक बाढ़, हीटवेव और अिनिÌचत वषार् जैसी घटनाएँ बढ़ 
रही हȅ, िजससे क ृिष, अथर्ËयवÎथा और जनजीवन पर Ģितकू ल Ģभाव पड़ रहा है। ऐसे मȂ, IMD को 
अपनी मौजूदा तकनीकȗ का और अिधक Ģभावी ढंग से उपयोग करना होगा, तािक मौसम 
पूवार्नुमान की सटीकता बढ़ाई जा सके । हाल ही मȂ, "िमशन मौसम" क े तहत IMD ने  Îवचािलत 
मौसम िनगरानी Ģणाली, डॉÃलर रेडार, आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस और िबग डेटा िवÌ
लेषण को 
अपनाया है। यह महत्वपूणर् है िक इन अत्याधुिनक तकनीकȗ का पूरी क्षमता से उपयोग हो और 
पूवार्नुमान Ģिकर्या को और तेज और Ģभावी बनाया जाए। 
  अतः मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करती हूँ िक पृथ्वी िवज्ञान मंतर्ालय इस िदशा मȂ IMD की 
क्षमताओं को और अिधक Ģभावी बनाने क े िलए तकनीकी नवाचारȗ और संसाधनȗ क े अि
धकतम 
उपयोग पर बल दे, त ािक जलवायु पिरवतर्न से उत्पन्न चुनौितयȗ का सामना िकया जा सके  और 
नागिरकȗ को सटीक मौसम पूवार्नुमान उपलÅध कराया जा सके । 
 
Demand to make Jabalpur a Logistics Special Economic Zone (SEZ) 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, जबलपुर, देश क े क Ȃ दर् मȂ िÎथत एक महत्वपूणर् 
नगर है, जहाँ से देश क े िविभन्न भागȗ तक आसान और Ģभावी पिरवहन संभव है। यह शहर नमर्दा 
नदी क े िकनारे िÎथत होने क े साथ-साथ राÍटर्ीय राजमागș का Ģमुख क Ȃ दर् भी है। देश क े सबसे 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
145

 
ËयÎत राÍटर्ीय राजमागर् यहाँ से गुजरते हȅ, िजससे यह लॉिजिÎटक्स और Ëयापार क े िलए 
अत्यिधक उपयुƪ बनता है। 
 भारत सरकार क े ǎारा गितशिƪ योजना, भारतमाला पिरयोजना, और डेिडके टेड ģ े ट 
कॉिरडोर जैसी पहलȗ क े तहत देश मȂ लॉिजिÎटक्स इंģाÎटर्क्चर को आधुिनक और क ुशल बनाया 
जा रहा है। जबलपुर का नवीनीकृ त और उच्च क्षमत
ा वाला हवाई अƿा इसे अंतरराÍटर्ीय और 
राÍटर्ीय Ëयापार क े िलए और अिधक सक्षम बनाता है। रेलवे क े महत्वपूणर् मंडल मुख्यालय क े रूप  मȂ 
जबलपुर की भूिमका इसे लॉिजिÎटक्स और पिरवहन क े क्षेतर् मȂ एक आदशर् क Ȃ दर् बनाती है। 
 इन अपार संभावनाओं को देखते हुए मȅ जबलपुर को लॉिजिÎ
टक्स Îपेशल इकोनॉिमक ज़ोन 
(SEZ) बनाने का माँग करती हूँ। इससे Ëयापार, िनवेश और रोज़गार क े नए अवसर सृिजत हȗगे। 
साथ ही, एक लॉिजिÎट
क्स सȂटर ऑफ एक्सीलȂस की Îथापना की जानी चािहए, जो अनुसंधान 
और नवीन तकनीकȗ क े माध्यम से भारत क े लॉिजिÎटक्स क्षेतर् को और अिधक सशƪ बनाए। 
 मुझे िवÌवास है िक जबलपुर, लॉिजिÎ टक्स कर्ांित का एक महत्वपूणर् क Ȃ दर् बनेगा और देश की 
आिर्थक Ģगित मȂ महत्वपूणर् योगदान देगा। 
 
Demand for train service from Goa to Solapur 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa):  Sir, I bring to the attention of 
the Government a matter of concern for the people of Goa and the surrounding 
regions.  The absence of a direct train service between Goa and Solapur 
(Maharashtra) is causing co nsiderable inconvenience to citizens, tourists and 
pilgrims alike.  The demand for this tr ain route has grown due to the increasing 
number of travellers visiting Solapur and nearby religious and tourist destinations. 
These include the Shr ee-Swami-Samarth-Temple in Akka lkot (approximately 40 km 
from Solapur), the Shree-Vitthal-Rukmini-Te mple in Pandharpur (about 75 km from 
Solapur), the Shree-Dattatreya-Temple in Ganagapur (about 95 km from Solapur), 
and other heritage sites such as Badami, B ijapur, Bagalkot and the Almatti-Dam.  In 
the past, the Vasco-Bijapur-Solapur tr ain connected Vasco-da-Gama (Goa) and 
Solapur.  However, this service was disc ontinued after the broa d-gauge conversion 
in the 1990s.  This train was beneficial for business travelle rs and pilgrims visiting the 
sacred places near Solapur.  Its disc ontinuation has remained a long-standing 
concern, with public demand persisting for its restoration to address the connectivity 
gap, which impacts business, tourism, and p ilgrimage activities.  I earnestly request 
the Ministry of Railways to reintroduce a direct train service connecting Goa and 
Solapur via Madgaon, Sanvordem, Collem, Hubballi, Gadag, Bagalkot, and
 Bijapur.  
This route would significantly ease trav el, enhance tourism potential in Goa and 
Karnataka, and improve access to Maharashtra’s spiritual and cultural landmarks. 
 
146
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Concern over Cyber crimes in the Country 
 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, हम िजतनी तेज़ी से िडिजटल दुिनया की ओर 
बढ़ रहे हȅ, ठीक उतनी ही तेज़ी से साइबर अपराध की संख्या मȂ भी वृिǉ हो रही है। िजस गित से 
तकनीक ने उन्नित की है, उसी गित से मनुÍय की इंटरनेट पर िनभर्रता भी बढ़ी है। एक ही जगह 
पर बैठकर इंटरनेट क े ज़िरये मनुÍय की पहुँच िवÌव क े हर कोने तक आसान हुई है। आज क े 
समय मȂ इंटरनेट का उपयोग लगभ ग हर क्षेतर् मȂ िकया जाता है - जैसे सोशल नेटविकȊ ग, 
ऑनलाइन शॉिंपग, डेटा Îटोर करना, गेिंमग, ऑनलाइन Îटडी, ऑनलाइन जॉब इत्यािद। 
इंटरनेट क े िवकास और इससे संबंिधत लाभȗ क े साथ साइबर अपराधȗ की अवधारणा भी िवकिसत 
हुई है।  
   भारत इंटरनेट का तीसरा सबसे बड़ा उपयोगकतार् है और हाल क े वषș मȂ साइबर अपराध कई 
गुना बढ़ गए हȅ। िडिजटल भारत कायर्कर्म की सफलता काफी हद तक साइब
र सुरक्षा पर िनभर्र 
करेगी।  अतः भारत को इस क्षेतर् मȂ ती Ĩ गित से कायर् करना होगा।  
  वतर्मान मȂ भारत की बड़ी आबादी सोशल नेटविकȊ ग साइट्स का उपयोग करती है। भारत मȂ 
सोशल नेटविकȊ ग साइट्स क े उपयोग क े Ģित लोगȗ मȂ जानकारी का अभाव है। इसके  साथ ही 
अिधकतर सोशल नेटविकȊ ग साइट्स क े सवर्र िवदेश मȂ हȅ, ऐसे मȂ सोशल मीिडया का 
सावधानीपूवर्क उपयोग ही हमȂ ऑन
लाइन ठगी तथा साइबर अपराध क े गंभीर खतरȗ से बचा 
सकता है।  
  साइबर सुरक्षा उपलÅध कराने क े िलये सरकार को और भी Ģभावी कदम उठाने की 
आवÌयकता हȅ। इस िदशा मȂ जागरूकता  बढ़ाना और साइबर सुरक्षा क े महत्व को समझना अत्यंत 
आवÌयक है। 
 महोदय, अत: मेरी सरकार से यह माँग है िक इस पर ध्यान िदया जाए। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member, Dr. Bhi
m Singh (Bihar), associated 
himself with the Special Mention made by Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee.  
                                                                                           
Demand for securing rights and protections for domestic workers 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, lack  of comprehensive legal protections for 
domestic workers has long plagued India. De spite their vital role in households, they 
suffer from exploitation and unsafe working conditions. Domestic work in India is 
largely unregulated. As per the National Domestic Workers’ Movement, 90 per cent of 
India’s domestic workers are women or children aged 12 to 75, with 25 per cent under 
age-14. Most are illiterate and engaged in tasks such as cooking and cleaning, 
traditionally seen as women’s work and considered subservient. Most of these 
workers lack formal contracts or prot ection under recently passed Labor Codes, 
leaving them vulnerable to exploitation. This situation is worsened by societal 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
147

attitudes in their better-off employers, wh o regard domestic work as menial labor 
rather than a profession deserving dignity.  
 The lack of proper implementation of existing legal protections allows 
employers to exploit workers without consequence. The Domestic Workers 
(Registration, Social Security, and Welf are) Bill, proposed by the National 
Commission of Women in 2009 is yet to be implemented. 
 To protect domestic workers, we must enact robust legislation ensuring fair 
wages, safe conditions, and social securi ty. The recent direction from the Supreme 
Court, calling on the Government to enact a separate law for domestic workers, only 
reinforces the urgency of these reforms.   I demand th at the Government should 
look into it.  Thank you. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The hon. Member, Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), associated 
himself with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Tiruchi Siva.      
Demand for conservation of mangroves in West Bengal 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal): Sir, West Bengal's mangroves, 
particularly the iconic Sund arbans, are facing threats th at may jeopardize both the 
environment and local community. These vital coastal ecosystems, renowned for their 
biodiversity and as a sanctuary for the Royal Bengal tigers, are experiencing 
significant degradation due to a combination of human activities and natural factors.
 One of the primary drivers of mangrove destruction is the rapid expansion of 
aquaculture, especially shrimp farming. This practice often leads to the clearing of 
extensive mangrove forests, disrupting the delicate balance of these ecosystems. 
Additionally, industrial pollution and agricultural runoff introduces harmful chemicals 
and sediments, further deteriorating mangrove health. Climate change exacerbates 
the situation, with rising sea levels an d increased frequency of cyclones causing 
erosion and saltwater intrusion. These ch anges not only weaken the mangroves’ 
resilience but also reduce th eir capacity to act as natu ral barriers against storm 
surges, putting coastal communities at greater risk. Urbanization and infrastructural 
development also play a significant role. The decline of mangroves has far-reaching 
consequences, including loss of biodiversity, diminished fisheries, and increased 
vulnerability to natural disasters. It is imperative for the Government, locals, and 
environmental organizations to collaborate  on sustainable management practices, 
enforce protective regulations, and promote awareness to  preserve West Bengal’s 
mangroves for future generations. 
148
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 I demand that the Government mu st implement strict  regulations on 
aquaculture and pollution, promote sustaina ble farming, restore mangroves through 
reforestation, engage and educate communities, enforce anti-logging laws, invest in 
climate-resilient infrastructure, and collaborate with environmental organizations to 
ensure effective conservation of West Bengal's mangroves.    
Demand for special drive to encourage Sanskrit education 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार):  महोदय, दुिनया भी Îवीकार करती है िक वेद से पुराना कोई गर्ंथ नहीं है। 
वेद, उपिनषद और हमारे अन्य Ģाचीन शाÎतर् ज्ञान क े भण्डार हȅ। इनमȂ सब क ु छ है। इनमȂ खगोल, 
भूगोल, भूगभर्, िचिकत्सा, रसायन, पदाथर्, गिणत, ज्यािमित, क
ं Ãयूटर , राजनीित, अथर्नीित आिद 
िवषयȗ से लेकर तत्व मीमांसा जैसे गूढ़ िवषयक ज्ञान भी हȅ। पूवर् राÍटर्पित व Ģिसǉ दाशर्िनक डॉ. 
राधाकृ Íणन जी का मानना था िक उपिनषद क े ऋिषयȗ ने िवचार की िजस ऊ ंचाई को ĢाÃत कर 
िलया है, उससे अिधक मनुÍय जाित कभी सोच ही नहीं सकती है। पर हम अपने ज्ञान भण्डार का 
समुिचत दोहन नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक हमारे ये गर्ंथ संÎकृ त भाषा मȂ हȅ और संÎकृ त आज 
ज्यादा पढ़ी नहीं जा रही है, िलहाजा मेरी सरकार से माँग है िक, (i) संÎकृ त िशक्षा पर जोर देने क े 
िलए िवशेष अिभयान चलाया जाए। (ii) वगर् 4 से 12 तक संÎकृ त की िशक्षा को अिनवायर् की जाए। 
(iii) CBSE, ICSE तथा KVS की तज़र् पर क Ȃदर्ीय संÎकृ त िशक्षा बोडर् की Îथापना की जाए। (iv)
स
ंÎकृ त मȂ उच्च िशक्षा हािसल करने वालȗ को उदारतापूवर्क छातर्वृिǄयाँ दी जाएं।  (v) संÎकृ त
िशक्षा को रोजगारपरक बनाया जाए।
Demand to reduce the cost of CPAP machine, masks and pipe filters used for treating 
sleep apnea disorders 
Ǜी नरेश बं
सल (उǄराखंड): महोदय, नींद मानव कायर्Ģणाली का एक आवÌयक िहÎसा है। नींद 
संबंधी िवकार जीवन की गुणवǄा को ख़राब करते हȅ और इस Ģकार कई ÎवाÎथ्य संबंधी समÎयाएं 
पैदा करते हȅ। भारतीय आबादी मȂ नींद से जुड़ी बीमािरयȗ का बोझ बहुत बड़ा है। आम तौर पर पाए 
जाने वाले नींद संबंधी िवकारȗ मȂ अिनदर्ा, ऑÅसटर्िक्टव Îलीप एपिनया, हाइपरसोमिनया, 
रेÎटलेस लेग िंसडर्ोम और िशÄट वकर् िडसऑडर्र शािमल हȅ। नींद की कमी या इसके  बार-बार 
बािधत होने से होने वाले िवनाशकारी पिरणामȗ को ÎवाÎथ्य पेशेवरȗ ǎारा उजागर िकया जाता है। 
"नींद अध्ययन" शÅद से आमतौर पर पॉलीसोÇनोगर्ाफी ( पीएसजी) नींद संबंधी िवकारȗ की 
ग
ंभीरता क े िनदान और मूÊयांकन क े िलए मानक है। नींद संबंधी िवकारȗ क े बारे मȂ सावर्जिनक 
जागरूकता  क े कारण नींद क े अध्ययन की माँग मȂ उÊलेखनीय वृिǉ हुई है। Ģयोगशाला-आधािरत 
"पीएसजी" एक महंगा परीक्षण है और हर जगह उपलÅध नहीं है। "CPAP MAC
HINE" और  
माÎक, पाइप िफÊटर, जो उपचार क े रूप  मȂ पेशȂट्स को िदये जाते हȅ, की लागत भी आम आदमी 
की सीमा से बहुत अिधक है। Ģभावी और अच्छे घरेलू परीक्षण नींद अध्ययन उपकरण बनाने क े 
[ 13 February, 2025 ]
149

िलए मशीन लिनȊग, क ृितर्म बुिǉमǄा और अन्य Ģगित मȂ अनुसंधान क े िलए सरकारी समथर्न होना 
चािहए। ĢौǏोिगकी मȂ Ģगित को पीएसजी और "CPAP MACHINE" को ǭदय गित या रƪचाप 
मॉिनटर की तरह एक िनदान उपकरण क े रूप  मȂ पेश करना चािहए। पेशेवर िनकायȗ को नींद 
अध्ययन उपकरणȗ की िनगरानी मȂ अिधक सिकर्य भूिमका िनभानी चािहए और यह भी स
ुिनिÌचत 
करना चािहए िक अच्छी गुणवǄा वाले उत्पाद जनता को उिचत कीमत पर उपलÅध कराए जाएं। 
मेरी सरकार से यह माँग है िक इस पर ध्यान िदया जाए। 
Concern over spreading of drug addiction among the youth in the 
border areas of Rajas
than  
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी ( राजÎथान): महोदय, राजÎथान, जो अपनी ऐितहािसक धरोहर, 
सांÎकृ ितक िविवधता और भËयता क े िलए जाना जाता है, वह आज एक गंभीर सामािजक समÎया 
का सामना कर रहा है - युवाओं मȂ नशे की बढ़ती ĢवृिǄ।  खासकर राजÎथान क े सीमावतीर् क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
यह समÎया तेजी से फ ै ल रही है और समाज क े िलए िंचता का कारण बन रही है।  इन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ नशे 
की सामगर्ी का अवैध Ëयापार और उसकी पहुंच ने न क ेवल युवा पीढ़ी को शारीिरक और मानिसक 
रूप  से कमजोर िकया है, बिÊक पूरे समाज की सामािजक और आिर्थक िÎथित को भी Ģभािवत 
िकया है। राजÎथान क े सीमावतीर् इलाकȗ, िवशेष रूप  से पािकÎतान और हिरयाणा, उǄर Ģदेश 
जैसे राज्यȗ की सीमाओं क े पास िÎथत िजलȗ मȂ नशे की ĢवृिǄ बढ़ रही है।  इन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ अवैध नशे 
की सामगर्ी जैसे अफीम, हेरोइन, चरस, गांजा, शराब और अन्
य डर्ग्स का कारोबार तेजी से फ ै ल 
रहा है। इन नशीली दवाओं का सेवन करने वाले ज्यादातर युवा हȅ, िजनक ी उĦ 16 से 30 साल क े 
बीच है। यह ĢवृिǄ िवशेष रूप  से संवेदनशील और गरीब इलाकȗ मȂ अिधक देखी जा रही है, जहां 
िशक्षा, रोजगार और सामािजक जागरूकता  की कमी है। युवाओं क े बीच नशे की लत का कारण 
आमतौर पर आिर्थक तंगी, बेरोजगारी, पािरवािरक समÎयाए
ँ और सामािजक असंतोष होते हȅ। यह 
आदत धीरे-धीरे उन्हȂ शारीिरक और मानिसक रूप  से नÍट कर देती है। अत: मेरा िनवेदन है िक 
सरकार इस संबंध मȂ आवÌयक कारर्वाई करे। 
MR. DEPUTY 
CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on 
Monday, the 10th March 2025. 
The House then adjourned at three minutes past six of the clock till 
eleven of the clock on Monday, the 10th March, 2025. 
150
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 