Vol. 268     Tuesday, 
No.12 5th  August, 2025 
 14 Sravana , 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Obituary Reference (
page 1) 
Papers  Laid on the Table (pages 2 - 5) 
Report of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel- Laid on the Table (page 5) 
Reports of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on 
Finance- Laid on the Table (pages 5  - 6) 
Reports of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on 
Energy- Laid on the Table (page 6) 
Reports of the Committee on Public Accounts- Laid on the Table (page 7) 
Statements by Ministers – 
     Status of implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in the One 
Hundred Thirty-seventh and One Hundred Fiftieth Reports of the Department 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare (page 7 ) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
 
Status of implementation of Recommend ations/Observations contained in the 
Second, Fourth and Twenty-third reports of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committeeon Water Resources (page 8) 
 
Announcement by the Chair (pages 8 - 15) 
 
Observations by the Chair (pages 15 - 23) 
 
Statutory Resolutions - 
Statutory Resolution seek ing amendment of Second Schedule to the Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975- Adopted (pages 23 - 24) 
Statutory Resolution approving the continua nce in force of the Proclamation dated 
the 13
th February, 2025 in respect of Manipur- Adopted (pages 25 - 30) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise
] 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :   http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
   https://sansad.in/rs  
   E-mail:   rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 5th August, 2025 /14 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
OBITUARY REFERENCE 
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your 
seats ...(Interruptions)...  Ãलीज़ अपनी सीट्स पर बैठ जाइए।  
I refer with profound sorrow to the pa ssing away of Shri Praveen Nayak, a 
former Member of this Hous e, on the 24th July, 2025. He represented the State of 
Gujarat in the Rajya Sabha from February, 2010 to August, 2011.  
Born on 3rd January, 1937, at Surat, in  Gujarat, Shri Na yak was a qualified 
engineer. He began his professional life in the manufacturing of chemical machinery, 
but soon made a significant transition into public life. Shri Nayak had a long and active 
political career at the local and national levels. Shri Nayak was known for his soft-
spoken nature, discipline and integrity.  
In the passing away of Sh ri Praveen Nayak, the country has lost a dedicated 
public servant, an able parliamentarian and a respected leader. We deeply mourn the 
passing away of Shri Praveen Nayak.  
I request Members to rise in their pl aces and observe silence as a mark of 
respect to the memory of the departed. 
(Hon. Members then stood in silence for one minute) 
Secretary-General will convey to the members of the bereaved family our 
sense of profound sorrow and deep sympathy. Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 

PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
Report and Accounts of the HLL Medipa rk Limited (HML), Thiruvananthapuram , 
kerala and related papers 
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģतावराव जाधव): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ : 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the HLL Medipark Limited (HML),
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, a subsidia ry of HLL Lifecare Limited, for the
year 2022-23, together with   the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the paper
mentioned at (1) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2768/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी बी. एल.  
वमार्): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ: 
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution (Department of Cons umer Affairs) Notification No. G.S.R. 
242(E)., dated the 21st April, 2025, publishing the Legal Metrology (General) Second 
Amendment Rules, 2025 under sub-section (4) of Section 52 of the Legal Metrology 
Act, 2009. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2939/18/25] 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs), 
under sub-section (1) of Section 105 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019: - 
(1) G.S.R. 378(E)., dated the 11 th June, 2025, publishing the National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission (G roup ‘A’ posts) Recruitment
(Amendment) Rules, 2025.
(2) G.S.R. 436(E)., dated the 1 st July, 2025, publishing the National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission (Group  ‘A’ posts) Recruitment (Second
Amendment) Rules, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), See No. L.T. 3043/18/25] 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Notifications of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND 
WATERWAYS (SHRI SHANTANU THAKUR) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following Notificati ons of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways, under sub-section (1) of Section 113 of the Inland Vessels Act, 2020: - 
(1) G.S.R. 346(E)., dated the 28 th May, 2025, publishing  the Inland Vessels
(Crew and Passenger Accommodation) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(2) G.S.R. 347(E)., dated the 28 th May, 2025, publishing  the Inland Vessels
(Registration and other Technical Issues) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(3) G.S.R. 348(E)., dated the 28 th May, 2025, publishing  the Inland Vessels
(Prevention and Containment of Pollution) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(4) G.S.R. 349(E)., dated the 28 th May, 2025, publishing  the Inland Vessels
(Life Saving Appliances) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(5) G.S.R. 350(E)., dated the 28 th May, 2025, publishing the Inland Vessels
(Fire Fighting Appliances) Amendment Rules, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (5), See No. L.T. 2972/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs  
कारपोरेट कायर् मं
तर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूँ : 
(i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of th e following Notifications of the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs, under sub-section (4 ) of Section 469 of the Companies Act, 
2013: - 
(1) G.S.R. 291(E)., dated the 7 th May, 2025, publishing the Companies (Indian
Accounting Standards) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(2) G.S.R. 317(E)., dated the 19 th May, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Accounts) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(3) G.S.R. 357(E)., dated the 30 th May, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Accounts) Second Amendment Rules, 2025.
(4) G.S.R. 358(E)., dated the 30 th May, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Management and Administration) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(5) G.S.R. 359(E)., dated the 30 th May, 2025, publishing the Companies (Audit
and Auditors) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(6) G.S.R. 360(E)., dated the 30 th May, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Registration Offices and Fees) Amendment Rules, 2025.
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
3

(7) G.S.R. 361
(E)., dated the 30th May, 2025, publishing the Companies (Cost
Records and Audit) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(8) G.S.R. 371(E)., dated the 6 th June, 2025, publishing the Companies (Filing
of Documents and Forms in Extens ible Business Reporting Language)
Amendment Rules, 2025.
(9) G.S.R. 426(E)., dated the 27 th June, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Incorporation) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(10) G.S.R. 427(E)., dated the 27 th June, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Restriction on number of layers) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(11) G.S.R. 443(E)., dated the 3 rd July, 2025, publishing the Companies (Listing
of equity shares in permissible jurisdictions) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(12) G.S.R. 452(E)., dated the 7 th July, 2025, publishing the Companies
(Corporate Social Responsibility Po licy) Amendment Rules, 2025, under
sub-section (4) of Section 469 of the Companies Act, 2013.
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (12), See  No. L.T. 2884/18/25] 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, under Sectio n 241 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016: - 
(1) IBBI/2025-26/GN/REG123., dated the 3 rd April, 2025, publishing the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of  India (Insolvency Professionals)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2025.
(2) IBBI/2025-26/GN/REG124., dated the 3 rd April, 2025, publishing the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process
for Corporate Persons) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2025.
(3) IBBI/2025-26/GN/REG125., dated the 19 th May, 2025, publishing the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process
for Personal Guarantors to Corporat e Debtors) (Amendment) Regulations,
2025.
(4) IBBI/2025-26/GN/REG126., dated the 19 th May, 2025, publishing the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process
for Corporate Persons) (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2025.
(5) IBBI/2025-26/GN/REG127., dated the 26 th May, 2025, publishing the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process
for Corporate Persons) (Fourth Amendment) Regulations, 2025.
(6) IBBI/2025-26/GN/REG128., dated the 4 th July, 2025, publishing the
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

[Placed in Library. For (1) to (6), See No. L.T. 3025/18/25] 
REPORT O
F THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश (झारखंड): महोदय, मȅ इÎपात मंतर्ालय से संबंिधत ‘ इÎपात Îकर्ै प पुनचर्कर्ण 
नीित’ क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत कोयला, खान और इÎपात संबंधी संसदीय  Îथायी सिमित 
(2024-25) क े आठवȂ Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित  (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ।           
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLI
AMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
SHRI YERRAM VENKATA SUBBA REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a 
copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Reports of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance:- 
(i) Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighth
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Finance (Departments of Economic Affa irs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises
and Investment and Public Asset Management);
(ii) Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Ninth
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii)
Twenty-first Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Tenth
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs;
(iv) Twenty-second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eleventh
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Planning;
(v)
Twenty-third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process 
for Corpora
te Persons) (Fifth Amendment) Regulations, 2025. 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
5

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Twelfth 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
(vi)
Twenty-fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Thirteenth
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Financial Services).
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLI
AMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
SHRI GULAM ALI (Nominated) : Sir,  I  lay on the Table,  a copy each (in English and 
Hindi) of the following Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Energy:- 
(i) Sixth Report on Action-
Taken by the Government on Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its First Report (Eighteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Power;
(ii) Seventh Report on Action-
Taken by the Government on Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second Report
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy;
(iii) Eighth Report on ‘Action-
Taken by the Government on Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fourth Report
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the
Ministry of Power’; and
(iv) Ninth Report on Action-
Taken by the Government on Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifth Report (Eighteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants ( 2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy.
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
DR. SUDHANSHU TRIVEDI (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following Repo rts of the Committee on Public Accounts 
(2025-26):- 
(i) 
Twenty-ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
fourth Report (  Seventeenth Lok Sabh a) on ‘Misappropriation of Public 
Money in Department of Posts’; 
(ii) Thirtieth Report on Action Ta ken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Establishment and
Operationalisation of Sagar Prahari Bal’;
(iii)
Thirty-first Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Indo-Nepal Border Road Project’;
and
(iv)
Thirty-second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of th e Committee contained in its One
Hundred Fortieth Report (Seventeen th Lok Sabha) on ‘Manpower and
Logistics Management in Delhi Police’.
STATEMENTS BY MI
NISTERS  
Status of implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in the One 
Hundred Thirty-seventh and One Hundred Fiftieth Reports of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
आयुष मंतर्ालय क े राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी 
Ģतापराव जाधव):   महोदय, मȅ 'वैक्सीन िवकास, िवतरण Ģबंधन और महामारी कोिवड-19 का 
शमन' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण स ंबं धी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित 
क े एक सौ सȅतीसवȂ और एक सौ पचासवȂ Ģितवेदनȗ मȂ अंतिर्वÍट समुिƪयȗ/िसफािरशȗ क े 
कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ वƪËय देता हूं। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2967/18/25] 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
7

 
 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Second, Fourth and Twenty-third Reports of the Department-related  
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी राज भूषण चौधरी):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत क े संबंध मȂ 
वƪËय देता हूं:- 
 
(क) जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय ( जल संसाधन, नदी िवकास और गंगा संरक्षण िवभाग) की    अनुदान 
मांगȗ (2024-25) क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत जल संसाधन संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े 
दूसरे Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ क े कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2955/18/25] 
(ख) जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय (जल संसाधन, नदी िवकास और गंगा संरक्षण िवभाग) की अनुदान मांगȗ 
(2025-26) क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत जल संसाधन संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े चौथे 
Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ क े कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2956/18/25] 
(ग) 'देश मȂ ग्लेिशयर Ģबंधन - िहमनद झीलȗ क े ट ूटने क े कारण िहमालयी क्षेतर् मȂ अचानक आने 
वाली बाढ़ सिहत ग्लेिशयरȗ/िहमनद झीलȗ की िनगरानी' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत जल 
संसाधन संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े तेईसवȂ Ģितवेदन (सतर्हवीं लोक सभा) मȂ अंतिर्वÍट 
िसफािरशȗ/समुिƪयȗ क े कायार्न्व
यन की िÎथित।  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2957/18/25] 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयȗ, हमारे िलए जीवन का सुअवसर है िक सदन मȂ हम माननीय 
Leader of Opposition Ǜी मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी क े साथ बैठते हȅ। उनके  Ģित आदर है, बहुत 
क ु छ सीखा है और सीखता हूं।  उनका 1 अगÎत, 2025 का एक पतर् िमला है, िजसमȂ उन्हȗने िलखा 
है, I quote:   
“CISF personnel are made to run into the well of the House when the Members 
are exercisi
ng their democratic right of protest.”   
 चूंिक Chair और the Leader of the Opposition क े बीच पतर् privileged 
communication की category मȂ आते हȅ, इसिलए उन्हȂ मेरे ध्यान मȂ आने से पहले मीिडया मȂ 
जारी करना िकतना उिचत है, यह उनके  और आप सभी क े co nscience, िववेक पर छोड़ता हूं।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  
यह िंचताजनक तथ्य है िक ...( Ëयवधान)... Please listen. Jairamji, please listen. 
...(Interruptions)... पहले चेयर को अपनी बात रखने दीिजए। यह िंचताजनक 
...(Ëयवधान)...  चेयर की मयार्दा मीिडया क े ...(Ëयवधान)... ितवारी जी,  आपकी बात िरकॉडर् 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
पर नहीं जा रही है।  आप चेयर को बोलने नहीं दे रहे हȅ।  पहले आप सुन लȂ, उसके  बाद 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान) :  * 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: चूंिक चेयर की मयार्दा मीिडया क े पास जाने की अनुमित नहीं देती, अत: इस पतर् 
से जुड़े िंबदुओं क े संदभर् मȂ rules position एवं relevant facts सदन क े संज्ञान मȂ लाना चाहता हूं।  
 ...(Ëयवधान)...  
Please, no disruption. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. 
...(Interruptions)... िसफर् मेरी बात िरक ॉडर् पर जाएगी।  ...( Ëयवधान)...  यह िंचताजनक 
तथ्य है िक मौजूदा सतर् मȂ लगातार disruptions की घटनाएं हो रही हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन (कनार्टक) :  सर, एलओपी को जवाब देने दीिजए।   ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मुझे पूरा पढ़ लेने दीिजए,  मȅ एलओपी को बोलने दूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  नािसर 
जी, आप सीट पर जाएं, मȅ एलओपी को बोलने दूंगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  मुझे अपनी बात कहने 
दीिजए। ...( Ëयवधान)... मुझे अपनी बात कहने दीिजए। मȅ एलओपी को बोलने दूंगा
।  
...(Ëयवधान)...   मȅ माननीय एलओपी को बोलने दूंगा।  आप मेरी बात सुन लȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
मȅ माननीय एलओपी को बोलने दूंगा। आप पहले चेयर की पूरी बात सुन लȂ। Ãलीज़, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ãलीज़, ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासि नक (राजÎथान) : सर, आप एलओपी को भी अपना पूरा खुलासा करने 
की इजाजत दȂ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: जरूर , जरूर।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
यह िंचताजनक तथ्य है िक मौजूदा सतर् मȂ लगातार disruptions की घटनाएँ हो रही हȅ।  
चेयर ǎारा बार-बार की गई अपील क े बावजूद कई माननीय सदÎयȗ ने रूल  235 और रूल  238 क े 
Ģावधान
ȗ को wilfully violate कर सदन को बािधत िकया।  
इसी 28 जु लाई को YSRCP क े एक सदÎय बोल रहे थे, तो क ु छ सदÎयȗ ने दूर से अपनी 
सीटȗ से उठ कर उनके  पास जाकर उनको बोलते समय माइक पर disrupt िकया।   
...(Ëयवध
ान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं, आपकी तरफ से कोई 
आवाज नहीं आनी चािहए। Ãलीज़। हम सबको िमल कर सदन को गिरमा क े साथ चलाना है। आप 
मेरी बात सुनȂ, Ãलीज़।  
क्या यह उस सदÎय क े िवशेषािधकार या बोलने क े, अिभËयिƪ क े अिधकार का हनन नहीं 
था?  ...(Ëयवधान).
..  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
9

 
 
31 जुलाई को ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)... 31 जुलाई को एक माननीय मंतर्ी देश 
क े िलए महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर suo motu बयान दे रहे थे, तब सदन क े क ु छ माननीय सदÎयȗ ǎारा 
उनके  पास जाकर लगातार नारेबाजी हुई, Ëयवधान िकया गया। क्या इससे जनता को जानकारी 
देने का संसद का एक महत्व
पूणर् काम बािधत नहीं हुआ?  
1 अगÎत को ही आप क े एक माननीय सदÎय एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर ज़ीरो ऑवर मȂ 
अपनी बात रख रहे थे। एक अन्य माननीय सदÎया ने दूर से अपनी सीट से जाकर उनके  माइक क े 
पास ऊ ँची आवाज मȂ नारे लगा कर उन्हȂ बािधत िकया। 
 
25, 28, 29, 31 जुलाई और 1 अगÎत को घिटत इस तरह की घटनाएँ parliamentary 
records मȂ दजर् हȅ। हम माननीय सदÎयȗ को self-introspection करना चािहए िक क्या ऐसे काम 
सदन की गिरमा, मयार्दा बढ़ाते हȅ?  
जैसा िक आप सभी जानते हȅ, सदन का वह एिरया, िजसे आम भाषा मȂ वेल कहते हȅ, 
उसकी एक sanctity है और वहाँ पर entry regulated है।  वहाँ जाकर ना
रे लगाना, सदन की 
कायर्वाही बािधत करना सवर्था अनुिचत है। उस Îथान की sanctity vio late करना सदन की 
गिरमा िगराने जैसा है।  
ज्यादा पीछे न जाकर सदन क े भीतर िपछले क ु छेक वषș मȂ वेल मȂ जाकर की गई क ु छ 
दुभार्ग्यपूणर् घटनाओं का उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा। इस सदन मȂ सदÎयȗ ǎारा माननीय मंितर्यȗ, 
सेकर् ेटरी-जनरल व Table of the House पर बैठे अिधकािरयȗ से िबल की कॉपी और अन्य 
महत्वपूणर् संसदीय पेपसर् छीन कर फाड़े गए, उन्हȂ उछाला गया।  
वेल एिरया मȂ चेयर, सेकर् ेटरी-जनरल की चेयर,  Table of the House और उस पर बैठे 
अिधकािरयȗ की सुरक्षा क े िलए Parliamentary Security क े personnel  ǎारा उस एिरया को 
cordon off करना पड़ा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
संसद क े सुरक्षाकिर्मयȗ का सदन मȂ उपिÎथत रहना नई बात नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप 
जानते हȅ िक इस सिर्वस की नींव ...(Ëयव धान)... आप जानते हȅ िक इस सिर्वस की नींव Central 
Legislative Assembly क े पहले elected भारतीय अध्यक्ष, आदरणीय िवƻल भाई पटेल ǎारा 
1930 मȂ डाली गई थी।  ये सुरक्षाकमीर् तब से अपना काम कर रहे हȅ, जो specially trained हȅ और 
िकसी तरह की फोसर् का इÎतेमाल न करके  अपना काम सदन की गिरमा को ध्यान मȂ रख कर 
करते हȅ। ...(Ëयव
धान)...  
जहाँ तक सदÎयȗ ǎारा अपने democratic right of dissent exercise करने की बात है, 
वह उनका अिधकार है। ...(Ëयवधान)... जहाँ तक सदÎयȗ ǎारा अपने democratic right of 
dissent exercise करने की बात है, ...(Ëयव धान)... यह उनका अिधकार है, पर वह इस सदन क े 
िनयमȗ और परंपराओं क े तहत ही, अपनी सीट से ही, न िक िकसी अन्य की सीट या सदन क े 
भीतर िकसी अन्य जगह से। ...(Ëयवधान)... िनयम क े तहत अगर अपनी सीट पर नहीं हȅ, तो 
माननीय सदÎय ǎारा कह
ी गई बातȗ को िरकॉडर् नहीं िकया जाता।  
माननीय नेता Ģितपक्ष, िजनका लंबा संसदीय अनुभव है, मȅ उनसे यह अपील करू ँगा िक वे 
िवचार करȂ िक वेल मȂ आना, शोर मचाना, सदन न चलने देना, अन्य सदÎयȗ को जो सदन की 
कायर्वाही मȂ भाग ले रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ न बोलने देना, क ै से िकसी सदÎय का democratic right to 
protest माना जा सकता है!  
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
वेल मȂ जाकर नारे लगाने व अन्य सदÎयȗ को न बोलने देने पर 1978 मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Tiruchi Sivaji, please sit down. 1978 मȂ तब क े माननीय सभापित ने इसे "contempt of 
House" की संज्ञा दी थी।  
 26 अĢैल 1988 को, तब क े माननीय उपसभापित ने इस Ģकार क े conduct को  “most 
disgusting” कहा था। अगले िदन माननीय सभापित ने इस घटना को  ...(Ëयवधान)... अगले िदन 
माननीय सभापित ने इस घटना को “repulsive and deplorable ” कहा था। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
उन्हȗने caution िकया िक “such an act which brought disrepute to the House, would not 
be tolerated.”   
मȅ बता रहा हूँ, यह 1978 मȂ तब क े चेयरमैन ने कहा था, िडÃटी चेयरमैन ने कहा था। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
इसी तरह 3 माचर्, 2008 को जब क ु छ माननीय सदÎयȗ ने Well of the House मȂ घुस कर 
नारे लगाए थे, तब क े माननीय चेयरमैन ने इसे rules का violation बताया। उन्हȗने इस सदन ǎारा 
Golden Jubilee of Independence क े समय पास िकए गए Resolution की तरफ ध्यान 
िदलाया, िजसमȂ अन्य चीजȗ क े अलावा हमने यह संकÊप िलया था िक "We will refrain from 
transgressing into official areas of the House, or, from any shouting of slogans." 
 इसके  बाद राज्य सभा क े 230वȂ सेशन (2014) मȂ जब कई सदÎय वेल ऑफ द हाउस से 
नारे लगा रहे थे, तब क े चेयरमैन ने कहा था, and I quote,  
“Hon. Members, for several days now, we  have been in a situation of being 
forced to witness deviations from the decorum of the House by Members coming into 
the Well and shouting slogans.” 
 ‘Entering the Well of the House and pers istently and willfully obstructing the 
proceedings of the House’ को उन्हȗने "gross disorderly conduct in violation of rules 
and etiquettes of the House" कहा था।  
इसी 230वȂ सेशन मȂ, एक सदÎय वेल मȂ नारेबाजी कर सदन की कायर्वाही बािधत कर रहे 
थे, तो उपसभापित ने कहा था "this might tantamount to breach of privilege of the 
House." िजसके  िलए माननीय सदÎय ने unconditional माफी मांगी and he also  expressed 
regret for the inconvenience caused to the officers and staff of the Secretariat. 
  मȅ दोहराना चाहूँगा िक ĢÌन काल और शून्य काल, दोनȗ ही Ģत्येक सदÎय क े िलए 
सरकार को accountable बनाने और लोक महत्व क े urgent मुǈȗ को उठाने क े िलए महत्वपूणर् 
औजार हȅ।  
वतर्मान सतर् मȂ अब तक िविभन्न महत्वपूणर् िवषयȗ पर हमारे पास  150 Starred 
Questions, 150 Zero Hour submissions   और 150 Special Mentions raise  करने का मौका 
था, लेिकन लगातार Ëयवधान क े कारण हम क ेवल 13 Starred Questions,  5 Zero Hour 
submissions  और  17 Special Mentions ही ले पाए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Ëयवधान क े कारण इस 
सतर् मȂ अब तक हम 41 घंटे, 11 िमनट गंवा चुक े हȅ।  
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
11

 
 
This way, are we not abdicating our responsibilities as Members of 
Parliament? Is it not a disservice to  the people whom we represent? 
...(Interruptions)... 
चेयर, माननीय LoP से अपील करती है िक वे ऐसे माननीय सदÎयȗ को, जो िनयम और 
परंपराओं की अवहेलना करते हȅ, यह सलाह दȂ िक वे सदन का कामकाज चलने दȂ और इसकी 
मयार्दा भंग न करȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह पक्ष और िवपक्ष की सामूिहक िजÇमेदारी है िक सदन की 
dignity, decorum और prestige पर आंच न आने दȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
पुन: आप सभी सदÎयȗ से आगर्ह है िक आप सभी बहस मȂ भाग लȂ। सदन को िबना बाधा 
चलने दȂ।  ...( Ëयवधान)... हमारी सामूिहक िजÇमेदारी, कामकाज, मयार्दा, आचरण से ही इस 
मुÊक मȂ लोकतंतर् की जड़Ȃ गहरी हȗगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
अंत मȂ, देश क े पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  की कही बात, let me quote.  
...(Interruptions)... Ãलीज़, अपनी सीट पर जाएँ। अंत मȂ, देश क े पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  की कही बात, जो उन्हȗने 14 अगÎत, 1958 को इसी सदन मȂ कही थी, उसे 
quote करते हुए, मȅ अपनी बात खत्म करू ँगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... I quote: 
“Pandit Jawaharlal Nehruji. “Parliament does set some kind of an example to 
the rest of the country. As we behave here to each other, towards our work, towards 
the general public, so, to some extent, othe rs will behave elsewhere, whether in the 
State Legislatures or in the many other or gans of self-government that exist in the 
country, right way down to that foundation of our democracy—the Panchayats in the 
villages.” मȅ पंिडत जी का quote पढ़ रहा हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे पढ़ने दȂ, आप चुप रहȂ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... “Even the Panchayats will be affect ed by the tone we set in this 
Sovereign Parliament of India.  Therefore, on all of us rests this great responsibility, 
not only to behave as we should behave, but to remember always that a million eyes 
are upon us and we may not do something that brings the slightest discredit on 
Parliament or set a wrong line before the people..."   
Thank you.  ...(Interruptions )... माननीय LoP. ...( Ëयवधान)...  Ãलीज़, आप लोग 
अपनी सीट्स पर जाएँ। मȅ माननीय LoP को बोलने की इजाजत दूँगा। आप सब अपनी सीट्स पर 
जाएँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप सभी अपनी सीट्स पर जाएँ। आप चेयर पर आरोप लगाएँगे और 
चेयर की भी बात नहीं सुनते? ...(Ëयवधान)... आप चेयर पर आरोप लगाते हȅ और चेयर का पक्ष 
नहीं सुनते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी को quote कर रहा हूँ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  Renuka ji, please go back to your seat. आप अपनी सीट पर जाएँ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... आप सभी अपनी सीट्स पर जाएँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ माननीय LoP को बोलने 
की इजाजत दे रहा हूँ।   
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Tiruchi ji, I am allowing the LoP to speak.  Only the Leader 
of the Opposition, nobody else.  …(Inte rruptions)…  Only the Leader of the 
Opposition.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ, क्यȗिक आपने बहुत बड़ा ज्ञान हमȂ 
िदया, जो हमने नहीं पढ़ा था। नहीं, मȅने आपसे िलया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: नहीं, सर। ये जो बहुत से references थे, जो हमने पढ़े नहीं थे, आपने हमȂ 
पढ़ाया, इसी
िलए मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...सर, दूसरी चीज़, मȅने आपको क्या 
िलखा, वह मȅ पढ़ता हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... "I am writing to you on behalf of the   Opposition 
Parties in Rajya Sabha. We are astonished and shocked at the manner in   which the 
CISF personnel are made to run into th e Well of the House when the Members are 
exercising their democratic right of protes t. We saw this yesterday and we saw this 
today as well. As our Parliament has been reduced to such a le vel, this is most 
objectionable and we condemn it unequivoca lly. We expect that in the future, CISF 
personnel will not come trooping in the Well of the House when Members are raising 
important issues of public concern.' मȅने इतना ही िल
खा  और मȅ आपको लेटर भेजा। 
Naturally, it is not possible to inform ever y Member. So, I gave a press note that I 
have written like this. Sir, shall I ask you on e thing? When Jaitleyji was the Leader of 
the Opposition in the Upper House and Sushma Swarajji was the Leader of the 
Opposition in the Lok Sabha, what did they say? उन्हȗने क्या कहा? उन्हȗने यह कहा िक 
िडÎटबर् करना भी democratic process को strengthen क े िलए है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया बीच मȂ न बोलȂ, एलओपी जी को बोलने दȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  “यह कोई बड़ी बात नहीं है, हम democratic way मȂ ही ĢोटेÎट कर रहे 
हȅ और यह करते रहȂगे, यह हमारा राइट है” - यह उन्हȗने कहा
।  अगर मȅने लेटर िलखा, तो उससे 
आपको इतना objection क्यȗ है?  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय एलओपी, आपने बोल िलया। 
 
SHRI  MAL
LIKARJUN KHARGE: To safeguard the interests... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : This was said outside the House and, therefore, I 
intervened.  ...(Interruptions)… ये सारी बातȂ outside हाउस कही गई थीं, इसिलए यह 
आपको बताना मेरा दाियत्व था। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
13

 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : To safeguard the interests of the Members of 
Parliament, अगर आप सीआईएफएस को अंदर लाते हȅ... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ िफर correct कर रहा हूँ और मȅने explain कर िदया िक वह सीआईएसएफ 
नहीं है, बिÊक पािर्लयामȂट सेक्युिरटी सिर्वस है। ...( Ëयवधान)... It was Parliament Security 
Service. ...(Interruptions)… It was Par liament Security Service. Correct it.  
..(Interruptions).. आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... I will come 
to Rule 267 notices. ...(Interruptions)
… नहीं, नहीं, माननीय एलओपी बोल चुक े । 
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय एलओपी, आपने अपनी बात कह ली। माननीय एलओपी को माइक दȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय एलओपी, क ृपया आप बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... क ृपया आप लोग अपनी 
सीट पर जाएँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please go back to your seats.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, हमारे पािर्लयामȂट क े Îटाफ इतने सशƪ हȅ िक वे हमȂ Ģोटेक्ट करने क े 
िलए मजबूत हȅ और वह आपके  क ंटर्ोल मȂ आता है। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: वे पािर्ल
यामȂट क े ही Îटाफ थे। ...(Ëयवधान)... वे पािर्लयामȂट सेक्युिरटी क े लोग 
थे। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, क्या आप पुिलस को लाकर, military को लाकर यहाँ हाउस चलाना 
चाहते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I want to correct you. पािर्लयामȂट सेक्युिरटी क े लोग थे। 
...(Ëयवधान)... धन्यव
ाद, माननीय एलओपी। ...( Ëयवधान)... मȅ पुनः ÎपÍट कर दूँ िक 
पािर्लयामȂट सेक्युिरटी क े लोग यहाँ काम कर सकते हȅ और कोई नहीं। ...( Ëयवधान)... क ृपया 
यहाँ पर ĥिम
त करने वाली बातȂ न बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, इसी हाउस मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... जैसे आदमी को यहाँ क े सभी Îटाफ 
ने उठा कर बाहर फ Ȃका था।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No,  please. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, लेिकन आज आप हमȂ जो इस ढंग से टर्ीट कर रहे हȅ, िवƻलभाई 
पटेल से लेकर...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me come to Rule 267 notices.  …(Interruptio
ns)… 
 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: क्या हम उतने अज्ञानी हȅ? ...( Ëयवधान)...  क्या हमȂ क ु छ समझ मȂ नहीं 
आता है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, धन्यवाद। यहाँ िसफर् पािर्लयामȂट सेक्युिरटी मȂ लगे लोग, माशर्Êस ही 
आ सकते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर,  इसीिल ए मȅ इस चीज को condemn करता हूँ और यह कहता हूँ िक 
इसको Ģोसीिंडग से िनकाल दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  इसका कोई वाÎता नहीं है, इसिलए इसे 
क ृपा करके  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I want to clarify िक पािर्लयामȂट सेक्युिरटी सिर्वस क े लोग ही यहाँ 
एंटर कर सक
ते हȅ और वे हमेशा आते रहे हȅ, जब जरूरत पड़ी है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  It want to 
put it on record. …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: All the examples which you have given should be 
removed from the proceedings.   
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, on Rule 267 …(Interruptions)…  34 notices 
have been received under Rule 267. It is observed that several notices under Rule 267 
are being given on daily basis.   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, क ृपया आप उसको पिढ़ए िक क्या-क्या नोिटस है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, please. जयराम जी, क ृपया बोलने दीिजए। मȅ पढ़ ही 
रहा हूँ। मȅ रूल  267 क े बारे मȂ पढ़ रहा हूँ। आप मुझे समय दȂ और धैयर् रखȂ।   
Hon. Members, 34  notices have been received today  under Rule 267. It is 
observed that several notices under Rule 267 are being given on daily basis. 
 Most of these notices do not mention … (Interruptions)…  आप चेयर को बोलने 
नहीं दे रहे हȅ। मȅ बता रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
Most of these notices do not mention the rule they seek to suspend, a 
mandatory requirement under Rule 267. Other notices do not contain any motion 
drawn in proper format. The detailed di rectives imparted by the Chair on 
8th December and 19th December, 2022 are not complied with. 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
15

 
 
  Some Members have been consistently raising varied issues including those 
that are sub judice or pertain to matters within the jurisdiction of State Governments 
that cannot be raised in the House.  … (Interruptions)…  Some other Members are 
giving notices on different subjects daily which are in the nature of issues to be raised 
during Zero Hour or Special Mention.  … (Interruptions)…  It, prima facie, appears that 
Members are themselves not sure on which subject they want to seek suspension of 
listed Business of the day.  …(Interruptions)…  
 I may also add that the issues on which Members are repeatedly seeking 
suspension of listed Business can be raised by other parliamentary devices like Short 
Duration Discussion, Calling Attention Notices, etc.  …(Interruptions)…   
Despite there being clear rules and elab orate Rulings/Directions, regrettably, 
some Members are using Rule 267 in an apparently casual manner.  When these 
notices are disallowed, the House is disrupted. … (Interruptions)… Our previous 
Chairmen were of the consid ered opinion that Rule 267 was applicable for raising 
rarest of rare cases and never on matters of routine nature.   … (Interruptions)…  
Members would appreciate that between 2000 and 2004, no Rule-267 notices were 
allowed.  Between 2004 and 2009,  only four substantive discussions under Rule 267 
took place. Further, out of  491 notices received under Rule 267 between  June 
2009 and May 2014, only  one substantive discussion took place by suspending the 
Business of the House.   …(Interruptions)…  From the year 2014 till the last Session of 
Rajya Sabha, out of 3,152 notices received under Rule 267,  only six notices were 
admitted for substantive discussion.  
Members may recall that a previous Speaker, Lok Sabha, Shri Balram Jakhar, 
held that he cannot make any comment upon the actions an d decisions of the 
Election Commission. He inter alia stated the following:   
“You know that I cannot comment upon the actions and decisions of the 
Election Commission which is an autonomous body. Never before have I done it nor 
will I do it now. Until and unless you change  the Constitution and bring the Election 
Commission under your purview, we canno t comment on its actions. I am only 
concerned with this that the Election Co mmission is an autonomous body and its 
decisions cannot be discussed here…”  
This is from Lok Sabha Debate dated 14.12.1988. 
 
 …(Interruptions)… 
 
 On the question of suspen sion of Question Hour, th e previous Chairman held 
that if an individual Member  suggests the suspension of Question Hour for which the 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Chair must give permission, then, the Chair has to be satisfied that there is a broad 
consensus about such suspension.  
  Members may recall that on 18 th December 2014, during the Question Hour, 
when Members raised the issue of a notice for the suspensi on of the Question Hour 
under Rule 267, the Chairman stated:   
“For Rule 267, I will tell you precisely what  you have to do. If you give notice 
under Rule 267, the notice has to be accepted by the Chair...that is point one; let me 
list out the rest to you. Then, a motion ha s to be moved; then a motion has to be 
carried; only then can you discuss something which is not in the listed Business...The 
position of the Chair is clear that if an individual member suggests the suspension of a 
rule, for which the Chair has to give permission, then, the Chair has to be satisfied 
that there is a broad consensus about such suspension”.  
[Rajya Sabha Debate dated 18.12.2014] 
 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
मȅ रूल  की िÎथित बता रहा हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, सुन लीिजए। आप िजसके  िलए 
agitated हȅ, मȅ रूल  की िÎथित बता रहा हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Regarding raising of  sub judice  matter, restriction has been self-imposed by 
Parliament in consideration of the fact that deliberations in a House on a matter which 
is before the court might influence the latter and thus, the  sub judice rule has found a 
place in the Rules of both Houses of Parliament.  ...(Interruptions)...  
As per the provisions in the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States (Rajya Sabha), any matter which is under adjudication by a court of 
law having jurisdiction in any part of India cannot be raised in th e House in any form 
such as questions, motions, resolutions and Special Mention or referred to in the 
House during any discussion or debate.  
[Rules 47 (2) (xix), 157 (v), 169 (viii), 180 B (vi) and 238 (i) respectively] 
 
 Members may recall that they cannot refer to  any matter of fact on which a judicial 
decision is pending. The observation of the Chair in one such matter is as under: 
On 15 th March, 1972, while Shri Niren Ghos h was going into the details of a 
case which was sub judice, Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee objected and said that a 
case which was sub judice could not be brou ght before the House in any manner or 
form. 
 The Deputy Chairman uphe ld his view and observed : If it is sub judice, you 
should not refer to it. 
 [Rajya Sabha Debate dated 15.3.1972]  
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
17

 
 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
It is well established that any discussions on matters pending adjudication 
before courts of law should  be avoided on the floor of the House so that courts 
function uninfluenced by anything said outside the ambit of trial and the observation of 
the Chair in one such matter is as under:  
“On 25th November, 1986, Shri K. Mohanan wanted to raise a question with 
regard to the decision of the Court in Kera la. He said that Mr. Justice Sukumaran of 
the Kerala High Court in his verdict had stated that the Electricity Minister, Shri R. 
Balakrishna Pillai, had violated his oath of  office and his reappointment as a Minister 
of State was unconstitutional. The Chairman observed:  
“Now I must stop. The point is this, as I have understood the matter. The 
Kerala High Court has said that this has b een referred to the Division Bench of Kerala 
High Court to advise them whether it has powers under Article 226 of the Constitution 
on the matter raised. Therefore, it is agai n fully sub judice and no decision has been 
taken. I am afraid, I cannot allow this discussion. I therefore say, I rule this out.”  
[Rajya Sabha Debate dated 25.11.1986]  
 
...(Interruptions)... 
  
Members, therefore, are requested no t to use Rule 267 more like a device 
being in the nature of Adjournment Motion rather than a motion for Suspension of 
Rules. Like Lok Sabha, there is no provision for Adjournment Motion in Rajya Sabha.  
Since none of the notices received und er Rule 267 are in adherence to the 
requirement of the rules as enunciated in the past, I am not admitting these notices.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
संसदीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा अÊपसंख्यक कायर् मंतर्ी (Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु): सर, क्यȗिक आपने 
एलओपी को बोलने का मौका िदया, तो मुझे भी respond करना होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ 
क्लैिरिफके शन क े िलए िसफर् एक बात पूछना चाहता हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... Leader of Opposition 
बहुत विरÍठ हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)... Ǜी मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी ने जो सवाल उठाया ...(Ëयव धान)... 
उन्हȗने specifically कहा िक सदन मȂ िमिलटर्ी, सीआईएसएफ और िदÊली पुिलस क े जवानȗ को 
लाया गया, तो मȅ यह पूछना चाहता हूं, ...(Ëयवधान)... क्यȗिक यह िरकॉडर् पर िक्लयर है िक सदन 
मȂ िसफर् माशर्ल ही आ सकता है। ...(Ëय वधान)... उस िदन भी माशर्ल ही थे, तो Leader of 
Opposition ने जो mislead िकया, सदन क े सामने गलत तथ्य रखा और आपको भी पतर् िलखा, 
...(Ëयवधान)... इतने सीिनयर लीडर और सदन क े Leader of Opposition जब चेयर को गलत 
पतर् िलखते हȅ और गलत तथ्य रख ते हȅ, तो इसके  िलए क्या कायर्वाही होनी चािहए, नहीं तो हर 
एक सदÎय गलत बात िलखेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह िरकॉडर् मȂ भी िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ कल 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
से देख रहा हूं िक  न्यूज़पेपर और टेलीिवज़न मȂ भी इस बात को दोहराया गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
न िसफर् मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी ने, बिÊक Opposition क े कई लोगȗ ने यह कहा है िक सदन मȂ 
िमिलटर्ी, पुिलस और सीआईएसएफ को लाए हȅ, जबिक यह गलत है। ...(Ëयवधान).. . जो भी इस 
सदन मȂ आते हȅ, वे माशर्ल ही होते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: इस तरह की गलत बात करके  इस सदन की गिरमा को िगराने का काम िबÊकु ल 
भी नहीं होना चािहए, यह मȅ आपके  माध्यम से LoP और पूरी Opposition parties से अनुरोध 
करना चाहता हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस क ु छ कहना चाहते हȅ। 
…(Ëयवधान)… Please g
o back to your seats.  …( Interruptions)… I will give you the 
opportunity to speak. …(Interruptions)…     Tiruchi ji, please sit down, I would give you 
the opportunity to speak.   
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, वे ठहरे हुए थे, बोल रहे थे, तो same law उनके  
ऊपर भी applicable होता है। उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे पूछना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक आप मेरे 
नेता हȅ, वे नहीं हȅ।  …(Ëयवधान)…  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित :  नहीं, नहीं। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: जब ये भी थे और जब मȅने िजकर् िकया िक CISF तो थी, लेिकन पहले क े 
जो  Opposition Leader थे , उन्हȗने कहा था िक disruption is also a part of democracy.  
…(Interruptions)…  यह आपको मालूम है।  दूसरी चीज़ यह है िक  आपने जो CISF लगाई है 
…(Ëयवध
ान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ िफर से संशोधन कर रहा हूं िक CISF नहीं है …( Ëयवधान)… Mananiya 
Leader of the Opposition, CISF नहीं है।  यहां  िसफर् माशर्ल ही आ सकते हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:
 £ 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: यह गलत आरोप है। …(Ëयवधान)…    
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: कौन चला रहा है, क्यȗिक उनका …(Ëयवधान)… 
    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mananiya Leader of the House. Leader of the House, 
आपकी बात ही record पर जाएगी। आप बोिलए।   
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): उपसभापित जी, आज का िदन बहुत ही ऐितहािसक िदन 
है।  …(Ëयवधान)… िहÎटोिरकल डे है, क्यȗिक पािर्लयामȂट मȂ, राज्य सभा मȂ जो आपने दो 
                                                            
£ Exupnged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
19

 
 
observations दी हȅ, वे दो observations सदा-सदा क े िलए अंिकत रहȂगी, record मȂ रहȂगी और 
वे आगे राज्य सभा को चलाने क े िलए reference point बन Ȃगी। …(Ëयवधान)…  आपने आज अपनी 
ruling क े माध्यम से दूध का दूध और पानी का पानी िकया है। आपने cl early यह बताया है 
…(Ëयवधान)…      
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sushmitaji, please. …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: जब सच्चाई सुनने की ताकत नहीं होती, तो यही शÅद िनकलते हȅ। 
…(Ëयवधान)… 
   
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप बोिलए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: मȅ यह कह रहा था िक आपने बखूबी इस बात को ÎपÍट िकया िक  
proceedings को disturb करना  undemocratic है और यह rules क े िखलाफ है। आपने 31 
July, 28 July, 25 July और 1 August को उन घटनाओं को उǉृत िकया, जो Ģजातांितर्क तरीके  
से House को चलाने मȂ बाधक हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… आपने यह भी बताया िक जब कोई  speaker बोल 
रहा है …(Ëयवधान)… अब मȅ यहां से बोल रहा हूं, तो मेरे बगल मȂ आकर खड़ा होकर कोई नारे 
लगाएगा, this is not democracy, this is  not how the House functions
.  
…(Interruptions)…  यह काम करने का तरीका नहीं होता है। मȅने कई बार कहा है…(Ëयव धान)… 
मैडम, मेरी बात सुन लीिजए। …(Ëयवधान)… मȅने इन लोगȗ को कई बार कहा है िक मȅ 40 साल से 
ज्यादा opposition मȂ रहा हूं, तो मुझसे tuition ले लीिजए, मȅ बता दूंगा िक िकस तरह से 
opposition
 को Ëयवहार करना होता है।  …(Ëयवधान)… अभी आप नए-नए हȅ।  …(Ëयवधान)… अभी 
क ेवल दस साल ही हुए हȅ।  …(Ëयवधान)…   अभी 30-40 साल और रहना है, तो मुझसे tuition ले 
लीिजए। …(Ëयवधान)… मȅ आपको बताऊं गा िक opposition क ै से होती है। …(Ëयवधान)…   दूसरी 
बात, जो Leader o
f the Opposition ने कही िक disturbance …(Ëयवधान)… यह बात अरुण  
जेटली जी ने कही थी और मȅ िफर कहता हूं िक disturbance क े बहुत-से तरीके  हȅ, इसिलए 
हमसे tuition ले लो। …(Ëयवधान)…  लेिकन, in democracy,  अगर आप लाठी भांजȂ और आपकी 
लाठी मेरी ना
क पर लगे, तो your democracy ends where my  nose begins. You have to 
understand that. इसिलए मȅ बोलना चाहता हूँ िक इनकी डेमोकर्े सी वहाँ समाÃत हो जाती है, जब 
वे अपने Îथान को छोड़कर रूिंलग  पाटीर् क े िकसी ऐसे Ëयिƪ को, िजसे बोलने का अिधकार है, 
उसे िडÎटबर् करते हȅ और उसके  बगल मȂ ना
रे लगाते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह अनडेमोकर्े िटक भी है।  
This is not disturbance; this is anarchism. ये एनािर्कज़म करने की कोिशश करते हȅ, िजसे 
हमȂ समझना चािहए।  तीसरी बात, आपने िडÎटबȄस क े बारे मȂ कहा। ...(Ëयव धान)... आपने बाद मȂ 
जो ऑÅज़वȃशन्स दीं, वे बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् हȅ, िजसे हमȂ सदा-सदा क े िलए ध्यान मȂ रखना चािहए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  Any person who is in the House to  maintain discipline and decorum by 
the order of the Chair is a marshal.  …(Interruptions)…   He is a marshal and, that is 
why, he is here.  …(Interruptions)…  इन्हȂ इस बात की तकलीफ है िक जब आपने िडिसिÃलन 
लागू िकया - इन्हȂ जो एनािर्कज़म करने की छू ट थी – तब  आपने उस पर रोक लगाई
। 
...(Ëयवधान)... उसके  िलए मȅ आपको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... साथ ही, मेरा 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
मानना है िक आपने जो ऑÅज़वȃशन्स दी हȅ, वे बहुत सही हȅ, िहÎटोिरकल हȅ, रेफरȂस क े काम 
आएंगी और आगे वे रेफरȂस Ãवाइंट्स बनȂगे।     
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, casting aspersions on the Chair will not go 
on record as per rules.  Now, Shri Tiruchi ji.  …(Interruptions)…  Please. Go back to 
your seats. …(Interruptions)… Tiruchiji  will speak. No problem. Please.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : First of all, I humbly request you to give a patient 
hearing. For more than half-an-hour, you have made some obse rvations which have 
gone on record and to the people. This is the Council of States. Different political 
parties are here. We should also be heard. When an issue has come up, at  least, a 
point of order must be accord ed. The Leader of the Opposi tion spoke. The Leader of 
the House also spoke. He said that he has got democratic right; we too have 
democratic right. So, Sir, we must be also...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That I have given to you.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, whatever observations you have made, we have got our 
reservation; that is entirely different. What the Leader of the Opposition gave was a 
letter, which you also mentioned. And the  Leader of the House very rightly said that 
they are considered to be Marshals. They are not the dedicated s ecurity staff of the 
Parliament who were here earlier. …(Interruptions)…    They have all been out. This is 
some other force which is now named as Marshals. …(Interruptions)…  That is 
different. Sir, let me remind you. …(Interruptions)…   You said the rules of this House 
were laid down by the great Vitthalbhai Patelji. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No; not rules. I told the Mars hal, the security service was 
started by him.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: I would like to recall, Vitthalbhai Patelji was the Chairperson of 
this House once. In the Central Legislative Assembly… 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, in 1930! 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  The day after Bhag at Singh threw bomb in the  Central 
Legislative Assembly, the security forces trooped in. He asked, ‘Who allowed you to 
come?’ He told the Home Minister--then called as  Home Member—‘Either you send 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
21

 
 
those people out or I will send you out.’ Th at is how he had laid down, Vitthalbhai 
Patelji...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He constituted …(Interruptions)…    
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, let me tell …(Interruptions)… The Leader of the House has 
very rightly stated what Mr. Arun Jaitley, as the Leader of the Opposition had said. 
Disruption of the Parliament is part and parcel of democracy... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You may not agree. …(Interruptions)…   I have cleared  the 
Chair’s position… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, please, I asked for giving me a patient hearing. Give me one 
minute. …(Interruptions)…  Sir, why are the Opposition  parties agitating? We are 
asking for discussion. It may be on any is sue. The Ruling Party should come to the 
Chamber for BAC or something. They should  also say that they are prepared for 
discussion. The Parliament is meant for debate, deliberation and decision. When 
there is no debate happening , we are insisting for debate. And, when we are raising 
our voice, we are being interp reted outside that the Opposi tion parties are disrupting 
the House.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Tiruchiji. …(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: At that time, when they were sitting on this side, why were they 
trooping into the Well? …(Interruptions)…  This is really an in sult to the Members of 
Parliament.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please be clear.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: We consider it as an insult. …(Interruptions)…  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No; no. …(Interruptions)…  Please take your seat 
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Why should we be treated like this? …(Interruptions)…   We have 
never attempted to do out-of-the way or acted un-democratic? …(Interruptions)…   
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅने चेयर की िपछले 20-25 वषș की सारी रूिंलग्स आपके  सामने क्लैिरफाई कीं। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आपके  सामने क्लैिरफाई कीं। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Why are we being treated like this ? …(Interruptions)…  W h o  
allowed them to come inside?  …(Interruptions)… Mr. Deputy Chairman , Sir, you are 
the custodian of the House. …(Interruptions)…  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, with whose 
permission, they entered into the House... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: ये सारे माशर्Êस हȅ, I am clarifying to you.  …(Interruptions)…      
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: You are the authority. …(Interruptions)… With whose permission 
did they come here?  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Did you ask  them to  come into the Well of the 
House?…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
The House then adjourned at forty-five minutes past eleven of the clock.  
 
 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
STATUTORY RESOLUTIONS 
 
Statutory Resolution seeking amendment of Second Schedule to the Customs  
Tariff Act, 1975 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Shri Pankaj Chaudhary to move the Resolution regarding 
approval of Notification No. 27/2025-Customs, dated 30 th April, 2025. Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)...   
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
23

 
 
 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ  िनÇनिलिखत संकÊप 
उपिÎथत करता हूँ :- ...(Ëयवधान)...  
           
 "िक सीमा शुÊक टैिरफ अिधिनयम, 1975 की धारा 8 क े अनुसरण मȂ, यह सभा एतà ǎारा 
िवǄ अिधिनयम, 2025 क े अनुसार सीमा शुÊक टैिरफ अिधिनयम, 1975 की पहली अनुसूची मȂ िकए 
गए पिरव
तर्नȗ क े साथ िविशÍट ĢिविÍटयȗ को संरेिखत करने क े Ģयोजन से सीमा शुÊक टैिरफ 
अिधिनयम, 1975 की दूसरी अनुसूची मȂ संशोधन करने वाली अिधसूचना संख्या 27/2025- सीमा 
शुÊक, िदनांक 30 अĢैल, 2025 [ सा.का.िन. 277(अ), िदनांक 30 अĢैल, 2025] का अनुमोदन 
करती है।" 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, क ृपया सतर् चलने दȂ। ...(Ëय
वधान)... Please take your 
seats.  ...(Interruptions)... आप अपनी सीट पर जाइए।  िबना अपनी सीट पर गए, it will not 
be recorded. ...( Interruptions)...  माननीय सदÎयगण, please,  it is a Statutory 
Resolution.  ...( Interruptions)... यह Ordinance है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हम सारे लोगȗ को 
सांसद होने क े कारण constitutional provision का भी पालन करना है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप 
जानते हȅ िक इसकी समय सीमा, अविध तय होती है। ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर आप समय सीमा क े 
तहत इसको dispose नहीं करȂगे, ...(Ëयव धान )... अगर आप इसको dispose नहीं करȂगे, तो क्या 
constitutional problem होगी, आप जानते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... It is our obligation. 
...(Interruptions)... जब से सतर् चल रहा है, हमने एक िबल छोड़ कर कोई काम नहीं िकया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, इसके  महत्व को समझȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय ज यराम  रमेश जी, आप 
लंबे समय तक ...(Ëयवधान)... आप लंबे समय तक सǄा मȂ रहे हȅ, आप समझते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आप लंबे समय तक सǄा मȂ रहे हȅ, आप इसके  महत्व को अिधक अच्छी तरह जानते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... No, please, I will move on. ...( Interruptions)... Shri Nityanand Rai to  
move the following Resolution. ...( Interruptions)... Please. ...( Interruptions)... We 
are now going to take up the Statutory Resolution with regard to the extension of the 
Proclamation issued by the hon. Presiden t in respect of the State of Manipur. 
...(Interruptions)... I sincerely hope that Members will rise to the occasion, use the 
floor meaningfully and utilise the time at their disposal, in a manner befitting the gravity 
of the matter and fulfill the constitutional obligations. ...(Interruptions )... यह 
constitutional obligation है। ...(Ëयवधान)... P l e a s e   g o    b a c k    t o    y o u r   s e a t s .    
...(Interruptions)... Please   go   back   to     your     seats. ...(Interruptions)...  
Shri Nityanand Rai to move the following Resolution. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Statutory Resolution approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation dated  
the 13th February, 2025 in respect of Manipur 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत संकÊप उपिÎथत 
करता हूँ :- ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
      " िक यह सभा संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 356 क े अधीन मिणपुर क े संबंध मȂ राÍटर्पित ǎारा  
13 फरवरी, 2025 को जारी की गई उǇ ोषणा  क े 13 अगÎत, 2025 से और छह महीनȗ की अविध क े 
िलए ĢवृǄ बने रहने का अनुमोदन करती है।" 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
The question was proposed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, I shall call upon the Members whose names have 
been received for the participation in the discussion. ...( Interruptions)... Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi. ...(Interruptions)... माननीय Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी, आप अपनी सीट पर नहीं 
है, आप वहाँ जाएँ और बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर वहाँ जाकर बोलȂ। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप अपनी सीट पर नहीं हȅ, तो आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... Please go back to your seats. ...(Interruptions )... आप बोलने मȂ रुिच  नहीं 
रखते। ...(Ëयवधान)... सुǛी सुिÍमता देव जी। ...(Ëयव धान )... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... सुिÍमता जी, 
आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी। Please speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव (पिÌचमी बंगाल): सर,  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not going on record.  आप िनयम जानती हȅ। सुिÍमता जी, 
आप बहुत अनुभवी हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप लोक सभा और राज्य सभा दोनȗ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव : एक िमनट, सर। I have a point of order.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Under which rule?  ...(Interruptions)... 
  
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:  Sir, it is under Rule 259. It  s
ays that the Chairman shall 
preserve order ...(Interruptions)...   Please ask the Treasury Benches to allow us to     
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप disorder create कर रही हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... You all are creating 
disorder.  ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... आप 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
25

 
 
इस सÅजेक्ट पर बोलने क े िलए interested नहीं  हȅ। It will not go on record.  
...(Interruptions)... Next speaker, hon. Tiruchi Siva ji.  ...(Interruptions)...   Please 
speak.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Shri Girirajan, Sir.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your name is here in the list.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Shri Girirajan. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR.  DEPUTY  CHAIRMAN:  Although  your  name  is  mentioned  here,  yet, I will call  
Shri Girirajan.  ...(Interruptions)... I will go by what you say. I will call him.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: We shall discuss about   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am sorry, it is not going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  
You are a very seasoned and senior person. You know the rules.  ...(Interruptions)... 
जो िवषय यहाँ listed है, उसी पर बात हो सकती है। ...(Interruptions)...  No! 
...(Interruptions)... Next speaker, Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli.  
...(Interruptions)... Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli, please speak.  िसफर् आपकी ही 
बात िरक
ॉडर् पर जाएगी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... अन्य माननीय सदÎय Ãलीज़ उन्हȂ बोलने दȂ, िडÎटबर् 
नहीं करȂ।  यह उनका लोकतांितर्क अिधकार है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Sushmitaji,   please go back 
to your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... Please speak, Pilli ji,  िसफर् आपकी ही बात िरकॉडर् पर 
जाएगी।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
  
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI (Andhra Pradesh): The House is not in order, 
Sir.  ...(Interruptions)... 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak. िसफर् आपकी ही बात िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  देश देख रहा है िक Statutory Resolution पर िकसी सदÎय को बोलने क े 
समय आप िकस तरह का अलोकतांितर्क काम कर रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)..
.  
   
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, on behalf of my 
party YSRCP, I rise to express my support fo r the extension of President’s Rule in the 
State of Manipur,  a decision that has not been taken lightly but is necessitated by the 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
grave and unprecedented circumstances  prevailing in the region.    
...(Interruptions)...  
 Manipur, a land rich in culture and diversity, has unfortunately been gripped by 
prolonged ethnic clashes, lawlessness, an d a total breakdown of administrative 
machinery. ...(Interruptions)... Over the past one year, we  have witnessed incidents 
of violence, destruction of homes, displ acement of thousands, loss of innocent lives, 
and a situation where constitutional governa nce virtually ceased to function. In such 
circumstances, continuing President’s Rule is not a choice but a constitutional 
compulsion.  ...(Interruptions)... The safety of citizens must always come before 
political calculations.  ...(Interruptions)... Despite several attempts at reconciliation 
and peace-building, the social fabric remains fragile.  ...(Interruptions)... The local 
administration has struggled to restore norm alcy and many areas remain as it is.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 The Constitution of India, through Article 356, empowers us to impose 
President’s Rule when there is  failure of constitutional machinery. And, in case of 
Manipur, it is evident that the local admini stration has not been able to discharge its 
duties in accordance with the Constitution.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 Under President’s Rule, the Union Go vernment, through the Governor and 
Central Forces, has been able to initiate impartial and focused efforts to stabilize the 
region, rebuild institutions, and pave the way for long-term reconciliation.  
...(Interruptions)... However, this process requires more time.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Restoring lasting peace is not an overnight task, especially when years of mistrust, 
socio-political divides, and security threats are at play. ...(Interruptions)... 
Therefore, I submit that the extension of Pr esident’s Rule is in the best interest of 
Manipur and its people, not just to restore law and order, but also to enable a durable 
framework for peace, justice and inclusive development. ...(Interruptions)...  We 
must stand united in sending a message that India will not abandon any part of its 
territory to chaos, and that the democratic  governance must return only when the 
ground is ready and safe for all communities.  ...(Interruptions)... We must commit 
to ensuring that when elections are eventua lly held and a Government is formed, it is 
done in an atmosphere of peace, fairness, and mutual trust. Until then, let President’s 
Rule continue firmly, fairly, and with a singular aim of healing Manipur.   
...(Interruptions)...  
 Sir, the situation in Andhra Pradesh is also similar. I, therefore, request the 
Central Government to consider imposing President’s Rule in Andhra Pradesh to 
bring order in the State.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
27

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय Ǜी मुजीबुÊला खान।  
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): सर, जब मिणपुर की हालत खराब हुई, मिणपुर क े law and 
order की situation खराब हुई, तब वहाँ 356 लगाया गया। ठीक है, राÍटर्पित जी ने वहाँ लगाया, 
अब उसे 6 महीना बढ़ाने क े िलए बोल िदया है, अच् छी बात है।*  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आप िवषय पर बोिलए। ...( Ëयवधान)... It will not go on record, 
Muzibullaji. …(Interruptions)… आप इस िवषय पर जो बोलȂगे, वही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा।  
मुजीबुÊला जी, आप िनयम जानते हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... अगर आप मिणपुर पर बोलȂगे, तो वह 
िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... कोई और बात बोलȂगे, तो िन
 यमतः वह बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं 
जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप मिणपुर पर बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान: सर, मȅ इतना कहना चाहता हूँ िक आज की जो हालत है ...( Ëयवधान)...  
मिणपुर मȂ भी डबल इंजन सरकार थी और वह failure हो गई। उसके  बाद वहाँ पर राÍटर्पित 
शासन लगाया गया है।  अब इतने िद
नȗ तक राÍटर्पित शासन क े बाद वहाँ पर अभी क्या situation 
है?  उसकी हालत सुधरी है या नहीं सुधरी है?  उसके  बारे मȂ मान्यवर मंतर्ी जी हमȂ जानकारी दȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... वह अभ ी िकस पोिजशन मȂ है और आगे चल कर जो हालत होगी, उसके  िलए 
क ेन्दर् सरकार भी िजÇमेदारी ले। ...( Ëयवधान)... इस तरह से बार-बार राÍटर्पित शासन लागू 
करना और एक िनवार्िचत सरकार को हटाना भी उिचत नहीं है, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : D r .  V .  S i v a d a s a n ,   n o t  p r e s e n t ;   S h r i m a t i  J e b i  M a t h e r  
Hisham, go back to your seat and speak.  …( Interruptions)…  Please go back to your 
seats. …(Interruptions)… So,  you are not interested in speaking!  …( Interruptions)…  
Shri R. Giri
rajan. …(Interruptions)… I have called Shri R. Girirajan.  Go back to your 
seat and speak. …( Interruptions)… And, speak on the su bject, as per rules.  
…(Interruptions)…  Girirajanji,  speak on the subject as per rules.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu): * …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No; it is not going on record.  …( Interruptions)… Speak on 
Manipur. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Shri Haris Beeran, not there;    Shri P.P. Suneer, not 
there. …(Interruptions)…  Shri Ramji, not there. …( Interruptions)… Shri Sanjay Kumar 
Jha, not there; Shri Javed Ali Khan, नहीं हȅ।  Do not come into the Well, Sushmita ji.  I 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
am warning you. …( Interruptions)… Do not come into the Well.  …(Interruptions )…  
Please go back to your seats.  …( Interruptions)… No.  …( Interruptions)…  As I have 
already  indicated, this Motion is a  Consti tutional obligation, I,  once again, request 
the hon. Members to maintain order and pa rticipate meaningfully in the discussion. 
…(Interruptions)…  Kindly allow the proceedings to be held smoothly and allow those 
Members to speak who wish  to participate in the debate. …( Interruptions)…   जो लोग 
Well मȂ हȅ, please go back to your seats.  Shri Nityanand Rai to reply.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय): महोदय, सबसे पहले तो मȅ यह बताना चाहूँगा 
िक एक हाई कोटर् क े फ ैसले क े कारण मिणपुर मȂ दो समुदायȗ क े बीच आर क्षण संबंधी िववाद क े 
कारण जातीय िंहसा भड़क उठी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... जो लोग कहते हȅ िक वह धािर्मक िंहसा है, वे 
िबÊकु ल ही गलत बोल रहे हȅ और एक सािजश क े तहत ऐसा बोल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित: माशर्Êस क े साथ इस तरह का behaviour ठीक नहीं है। ...( Ëयवधान)... 
Please go back to your seats.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, मȅने सुना िक अभी एक माननीय सदÎय ने कहा िक राÍटर्पित शासन 
क े बाद वहाँ की िÎथित क्या है। ...( Ëयवधान)... मȅ उनको बताना चाहूँगा िक राÍटर्पित शासन 
लागू हुए 8 महीने हुए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIR
MAN: Please go back to your seats. …( Interruptions)…  You are 
not supposed to come into the Well. …(Interruptions)…     
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, इन 8 महीने मȂ िंहसा मȂ िसफर् एक हत्या हुई है। ...( Ëयवधान)... 
इधर क े चार महीनȗ मȂ एक भी मौत नहीं हुई है। ...(Ëयवधान)..
 . जब मिणपुर मȂ िंहसा भड़की थी, 
उसके  बाद माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने मिणपुर राज्य क े िंहसा Ģभािवत क्षेतर्ȗ का दौरा िकया और दौरा 
क े दौरान उन्हȗने उच्चािधकारी, सुरक्षा बलȗ और सामािजक संगठनȗ क े साथ, 100 से अिधक 
सदÎयȗ क े साथ मीिंटग की। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज वहाँ शांित ËयवÎथा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: क ृपया आप लोग अपनी-अपनी सीट पर बैठȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े िवकास दृिÍटकोण क े कारण नॉथर्-ईÎट 
मȂ इतन ा  िवकास हुआ है। ...( Ëयवधान)... महोदय, मȅ अनुरोध करता हूँ िक मिणपुर राज्य क े 
संबंध मȂ संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 356(ए) क े तहत राÍटर्पित ǎारा िदनांक 13 फरवरी, 2025 को जारी 
की गई उǇोषणा को इस सदन ǎारा अनुमोिदत करने की क ृपा करȂ। ...( Ëयवधान)…मȅ अनुरोध 
[ 05 August, 2025 ]
29

 
 
कर रहा हूँ िक संिवधान क े तहत िनधार्िरत उǇोषणा की एक Ģित पिरणामी आदेश क े साथ सदन 
क े पटल पर रख दी गई है।  
                       
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question is …(Interruptio ns)… You have to go back to 
your seats. Then only you can say ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ …(Interruptions)…  मȅ आपको पुनः मौका 
देता हूँ िक आप अपनी सीट्स पर जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... ‘No’ कहने का आपका अिधकार है, 
dispose
 करने का आपका अिधकार है, लेिकन यह अिधकार वैल से नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... I will 
read …(Interruptions)… Please go back to your seats. …(Interruptions)… आप वैल से 
िकसी तरह क े अिधकार की माँग नहीं कर सकते। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
Please go back to your seats. …(Interruptions)…   Now, the question is: 
 
  “That this House approves the continuance in force of the Proclamation dated 
the 13 th February, 2025 in respect of Manipur, issued under article 356 of the 
Constitution by the President, for a further period of six months with effect from 13th 
August, 2025.” 
The  motion was adopted. 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Statutory Resolution is adopted. …(Interruptions)… 
The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 6th August, 
2025. 
 
The House then adjourned at sixteen minutes past two of the clock till eleven of  
the clock on Wednesday, the 6
th August, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 