Vol. 265 Wednesday, 
No. 3  24 th July, 2024 
      2 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
CONTENTS 
Welcome to Parliamentary delegation from Tanzania (page 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 -9) 
Reports of the Public Accounts Committee (pages 9 - 11) 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (page 11) 
Leave of Absence- Granted (page 12) 
Motion for Election to the Committee on Welfare of Other Backward 
Classes -Adopted (page 12)
Motion for Nomination to the Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes -Adopted (page 13) 
Motion for Nomination to the Committee on Public Accounts -Adopted (page 13) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Motion for Nomination to the Committee on Public Undertakings -Adopted (page 14) 
Observations by the Chair (page 14) 
Regarding Mentioning of States in the Budget and other Matters (pages  14 -19) 
Matters rai
sed with Permission- 
Demand to take necessary steps to stop erosion by the Ganga river in Malda, 
West Bengal (pages 21 -22) 
 Demand for justice to the family of the victims of the 1985 Kanishka Bombing 
(pages 22 - 23) 
Demand for increasing road infrastructure under the PMGSY scheme 
(page 24) 
Concern over the navigational clearance in the Brahmaputra River (page 25) 
Demand to expedite the work related to the establishment  o f AIIMS at 
Darbhanga, Bihar (page 26) 
Request to construct Pachpedi ghat bridge in Lakhimpur Khiri, Uttar Pradesh 
(pages 26 - 27) 
Demand to reduce rate of GST on Mediclaim Policies (pages 27 - 28) 
Request to confer Bharat Ratna to Late Dr. Panjabrao Shamrao Deshmukh
 for his great contribution to the country especially in the field of education
 and agriculture (pages 28 - 29) 
Demand to release the funds for the Chennai Metro Rail project, Phase-II 
(page 29) 
Demand to declare Rath Yatra of Mahaprabhu Shri Jagannath as a National 
Holiday (pages 30 - 31) 
Demand for inquiry into the financial irregularities by the Karnataka Government 
(pages 31 - 32) 
Concern over increasing number of deaths due to dog bites (pages 32 -33) 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Concern over emerging threats and potential risks associated with Artificial 
Intelligence (pages 33 - 35) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 35 - 71) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Deb ate, published electronically on the Rajya 
Sabha website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
General Discussion- 
The Union Budget, 2024-25 - Not Concluded. (pages 72 -  122) 
The Budget of Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25- Not Concluded.   
(pages 72 - 122) 
Special Mentions-  
Concern over natural calamities in Karnataka, its neighbouring States and 
other parts of our country (pages 123 - 132) 
Demand for Unified Law on Industrial Accidents in India (pages 132 - 133) 
Demand to increase the amount of Member of Parliament Local Area 
Development Scheme i.e. 'MPLAD' (p
ages 133 - 134) 
Government to intervene in the recent hike of import duty for exp orters of
Oranges from Vidarbha region in Maharashtra to Bangladesh
(pages 134 - 135) 
Demand for Tribal Circuit for Western Odisha under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
(Kalahandi - Rayagada - Koraput – Kandhamal) (page 135) 
The issue of reconstruction of Marathwada Statutory Development Board 
(pages 136 - 137) 
Concern over abuse of elders (page 137) 
Demand for making tourism management simple and effective by using 
technology (pages 137 - 138) 
Demand for reservation of seats for Limboo and Tamang Scheduled Tribe 
Communities in the Sikkim Legislative Assembly (pages 138 - 139) 
Demand for holistic development of Kozhiko de International Airport 
(pages 139 - 140) 
Demand for conservation of Shaniwar Wada Architecture o f Pune 
(pages 140 - 141) 

The issue of Life and Medical Insurance and Public Secto r Insurance 
Companies (page 141) 
Demand t o increase in the number of beds in emergency ward  of AIIMS,
 Patna (page 142) 
Demand for Nipah viral testing facilities in Kerala (pages 142 - 143) 
The need to ensure efficient implementation of MNREGS (pages 143 - 144) 
Concern over access to washrooms, sanitation facilities like toilets in 
educational institutions and work places for women across the country 
(pages 144 - 145) 
Demand for change in the timing of Ranchi-Patna Jan Shatabdi Exp ress 
(pages 145 - 146) 
Demand for reservation for Sched uled Tribes in the Goa Legislative Assembly 
(page 146) 
Demand for inclusion of languages spoken in Odisha into the 8th Schedule of 
Constitution (page 147) 
Demand for awareness campaign of Central Government schemes through 
banks (pages 147 - 148) 
Demand to expedite projects under Bharatmala in the State of Bihar 
(pages 148 - 149) 
Concern over energy security projects in Tamil Nadu (page 149) 
Concern over attacks by stray animals in the country (page 150) 
Concern over difficulties faced by pilgrims in Char Dham Yatra in Uttarakhand 
(pages 150 - 151) 
Need for Reconsideration of NCTE’s oversight of NIOS D.El.Ed (ODL) 
programme (pages 151 - 152) 
Demand for adequate budgetary allocation for ensuring safety of mining 
workers (page 152) 
Demand for bringing back the royal throne of Maharaja Ranjit Singh ji 
(page 153) 
Demand for establishment of a multi-purpose industrial training centre and Hi-
tech Trade Centre with Entertainment Park at North Chennai industrial 
cluster (pages 153 - 154) 
Demand for formation of Greater Cooch Behar as a Union Territory 
(pages 154 - 155) 
Demand to increase the One Stop Centres in Odisha (page 155) 
Demand to establish more Kendriya Vidalayas and Eklavya Schools in Odisha 
(page 156) 

Demand for effective flood management works in India (pages 156 -157) 
Need to address the issues faced by Agricultural Workers (page 157) 
Concern over high level of pollution in rivers flowing through Bagpat, Uttar 
Pradesh (page 158) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Wednesday, the 24th July, 2024/2, Sravana 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
WELCOME TO PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION FROM TANZANIA 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, on my own behalf and on behalf of this august 
House, I have great pleasure in welcoming hon. Dr. Tulia Ackson, President of the 
International Parliamentary Union, IPU, and Speaker of the National Assembly of 
Tanzania.  She is on an official visit to India as our honoured guest. 
Hon. Dr. Tulia Ackson arrived in Bharat on Friday, the 19th July, 2024.  She has 
visited Agra on 21 st July, 2024. Yesterday she also witnessed the presentation of the 
Union Budget, 2024-25 in the Lok Sabha. Hon. Members, she is now seated in the 
Special Box. We wish her a happy and fruitf ul stay in our country. We also wish her 
success in her role as the Pr esident of the International Parliamentary Union. Through 
her, we convey our greetings and best wish es to the Members of  the Parliament of 
Tanzania, the Government and the friendly people of Tanzania. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be laid on the Table.
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of NCERT, New Delhi and related papers 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी जयंत चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
(a) Annual Report of the National Counc il of Educational Research and
Training (NCERT), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23.
(b) Annual Accounts of the National Counc il of Educational Research and
Training (NCERT), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit
Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on the working of the above Council.
(d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at

 
 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 165/18/24] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Finance  
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ:- 
 
(i) 
A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 182(E)., dated the 12 th March, 2024, amending 
the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, issued under sub-section (1) of 
Section 8A of the said Act, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 169/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 183(E)., dated the 12 th March, 2024, amending 
the Principal Notification No. G.S.R. 785(E), dated the 30 th June, 2017, issued 
under sub-section (1) of Section 25 of the Customs Act, 1962 and sub-section 
(12) of Section 3 of the Customs Tari ff Act, 1975, along with Explanatory 
Memorandum. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 168/18/24] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs  
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी
 (Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ:- 
 
(i) 
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. 
S.O. 1120(E)., dated the 7 th March, 2024, amending the Fourth Schedule to the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, by inserting the name of Mohammad 
Qasim Gujjar @ Salman @ Suleman in th at Schedule, under sub-section (5) of 
Section 35 of the said Act. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 305/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. 
G.S.R. 26., in the Weekly Gazette date d the March 3, 2024 - March 9, 2024, 
publishing the Ministry of Home Af fairs, Assam Rifles Naib Subedar 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(Draughtsman), Group ‘B’(Combatised) Posts Recruitment Rules, 2024, under 
Section 167 of the Assam Rifles Act, 2006. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 307/18/24] 
 
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, under sub-section (3) of Section 18 of the Central Reserve Police 
Force Act, 1949: -  
 
 (1) G.S.R. 147(E)., dated the 29
th February, 2024, publishing the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Central Reserve Police Force, Tradesmen Cadre, Assistant 
Sub-Inspector (Carpenter), Group 'C' Post, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (2) G.S.R. 220(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2024, publishing the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Central Reserve Po lice Force, Technical Cadre, Sub-
Inspector (Armourer) and Sub-Inspect or (Motor Mechanic), Group 'B' 
Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (3) G.S.R. 277(E)., dated the 16 th May, 2024, publishing the Central 
Reserve Police Force, Pioneer Cadre (Group 'B' and Group 'C' Posts) 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (4) G.S.R. 308(E)., dated the 4 th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Central Reserve Polic e Force, Tradesmen Cadre, Head 
Constable (Cook) and Head Constable (Water Carrier), Group 'C' 
Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (4) See No. L. T. 306/18/24] 
 
(iv)  A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following No tifications of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, under sub-sect ion (3) of Section 155 of the Sashastra 
Seema Bal Act, 2007: - 
 
 (1) G.S.R. 198., in the Weekly Gaze tte dated the December 17 - December 
23, 2023, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal 
Group 'A' Combatised (Gazetted) Ministerial and Private Secretary 
Cadre Post Recruitment Rules, 2023, along with delay statement. 
 (2) G.S.R. 01., in the Weekly Gaze tte dated the January 7 - January 13, 
2024, publishing the Sashastra Seema Bal, Combatised, Ministerial and 
Stenographers (Non-Gazetted) Grou p 'B' Posts Recruitment Rules, 
2024, along with delay statement. 
 (3) G.S.R. 16., in the Weekly Gazett e dated the February 18 - February 24, 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
3

 
 
2024, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal, 
Combatised, Para-Medical Cadre (Group ‘B’ Posts) Recruitment 
Rules, 2024. 
 (4) G.S.R. 17., dated the 24
th February, 2024, publishing the Sashastra 
Seema Bal Combatised Para-Medi cal Cadre (Group ‘C’ Posts) 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (5) G.S.R. 31., in the Weekly Gazette dated the March 10 - March 16, 2024, 
publishing the Ministry of Home Affa irs, Sashastra Seema Bal, Assistant 
Sub-Inspector (Veterinary), Head  Constable (Veterinary) and 
Constable (Veterinary), Group 'C' Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (6) G.S.R. 32., dated the 16 th March, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal, Co mbatised  Communication  Cadre, 
Assistant Sub- Inspector (Comm unication) and Head Constable 
(Communication), Group ‘C’ Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (7) G.S.R. 33., dated the 16 th March, 2024, publishing the Sashastra 
Seema Bal Group ‘A’ Combatised Engineering Cadre Recruitment 
(Amendment) Rules, 2024. 
 (8) G.S.R. 55., dated the 18 th May, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal, Combatised Engineering Cadre, 
Inspector (Draughtsman), Inspector (Pioneer), Sub-Inspector 
(Draughtsman) and Sub-Inspector (Pioneer), Group ‘B’ Posts, 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (9) G.S.R. 56., dated the 18 th May, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal, Comb atised, Constable (Driver), Group 
‘C’ Post, Recruitment   Rules, 2024. 
 (10) G.S.R. 54., in the Weekly Gazette dated the May 12 - May 18, 2024, 
publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal, 
Combatised, Communication Cadre, Inspector (Communication) and 
Sub-Inspector (Communication), Group ‘B’ Posts, Recruitment Rules, 
2024. 
 (11) G.S.R. 74., dated the 15
th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal, Combatised, Inspector (Junior Hindi 
Translator) Group ‘B’ Post, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
 (12) G.S.R. 75., dated the 15
th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Sashastra Seema Bal,  Combatised, Ministerial and 
Stenographer Cadre, Assistant Sub-Inspector (Stenographer), 
Assistant Sub-Inspector (Ministerial) and Head Constable 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(Ministerial),Group ‘C’ Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (12) See No. L. T. 309/18/24] 
 
I. Report and Accounts (2022-23) of various IISERs ; NITs and related papers 
II.   Report and Accounts (2022-23) of AI U, New Delhi; IIAS, Shimla, Himachal 
Pradesh; ICSSR, New Delhi; and ICHR, New Delhi and related papers 
 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी सुकान्त मजूमदार):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(4) of Section 22 of the National Institut e of Technology, Science, Education and 
Research Act, 2007: - 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report of the Indian Inst itute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER) Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2022-23.    
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Inst itute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER) Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2022-23, and 
the Audit Report thereon.    
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 592/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Indian Inst itute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER) Mohali, Punjab, for the year 2022-23.    
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Inst itute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER) Mohali, Punjab , for the year 2022-23, and the 
Audit Report thereon.    
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 593/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Science 
Education and Research (IISER) Bh opal, Madhya Pradesh, for the 
year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Inst itute of Science Education and 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
5

 
 
Research (IISER) Bhopal, Madhya  Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, 
and the Audit Report thereon.    
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 594/18/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology 
Durgapur, West Bengal, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 595/18/24] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology 
Agartala, Tripura, for the year 2022- 23, together with the Auditor’s 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 596/18/24] 
 
(vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Maulana Azad National Institute of 
Technology, Bhopal, Madhya Pr adesh, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 183/18/24] 
 
(vii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 187/18/24] 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
(viii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sardar Vallabhbhai National 
Institute of Technology, Surat, Gujarat, for the year 2022-23, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 184/18/24] 
 
(ix) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Mot ilal Nehru National Institute of 
Technology Allahabad, Prayagraj,  Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2022-
23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 185/18/24] 
 
(x) (a) Annual Report of the National Institut e of Technology Srinagar, UT of 
Jammu & Kashmir, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the National Instit ute of Technology Srinagar, UT 
of Jammu & Kashmir, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.         
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 186/18/24] 
 
(xi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology 
Meghalaya, for the year 2022-23, toge ther with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 597/18/24] 
 
(xii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology 
Nagaland, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
7

on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 598/18/24] 
(xiii) (a)
 Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology
Goa, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reas
ons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 599/18/24] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
(i) (a) Annual Report of the Association of Indian Universities (AIU), New
Delhi, for the year 2022-23. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Association of Indian Universities (AIU), New
Delhi, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on the working of the above Association.
(d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 188/18/24] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Advanced
Study (IIAS), Shimla, Himancha l Pradesh for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 180/18/24] 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Council of Social Science
Research (ICSSR), New Delhi, fo r the year 2022-23, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council.
(c) Statement giving reasons for th e delay in laying the papers
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
mentioned at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 181/18/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Council of Historical 
Research (ICHR), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 182/18/24] 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL:  Sir, I lay on the Ta ble, a copy each (in English and Hindi) 
of the following Reports* of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-24):- 
 
(i) 124th Report on  Construction of toilets in schools by CPSEs; 
(ii) 125th Report on Rejuvenation of River Ganga (Namami Gange); 
(iii) 126th Report on Avoidable Payment due to Non-Charging of Service Tax/ 
GST from the Passengers; 
(iv) 127th Report on Action Taken by the Go vernment on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 46 th Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on Implementation of Pub lic Private Partnership Project at 
Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai; 
(v) 128th  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 71 st Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on Implementation of USOF Project (Phase - I) to Provide Mobile 
Services in Areas Affected by Left Wing Extremist; 
(vi) 129th Report on Action Taken by the Go vernment on the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 93 rd Report (15 th Lok 
                                                            
* The Reports were presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 23 rd February, 2024 and 29 th April, 
2024 and to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on the 28 th February, 2024 and 13 th May, 2024, before 
dissolution of the 17th Lok Sabha. The Speaker had ordered the printing, publication and circulation of 
the Reports. 
 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
9

 
 
Sabha) on Performance of Civil Aviation in India; 
(vii) 130th Report on Pradhan Mantri Ujjawala Yojana; 
(viii) 131st Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 39 th Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on Failure to implement Sche me objectives on disbursement of 
Capital Subsidy; 
(ix) 132nd Report on Derailment in Indian Railways; 
(x) 133rd Report on Short Closure of Electri fication Works due to Incomplete Pre-
Requisite Works: South East Central Railway; 
(xi) 134th Report on Infructuous Expenditure on Creation of Mid-Life Rehabilitation 
Facilities at Parel Workshop, Central Railways; 
(xii) 135th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Observation/ 
Recommendations of PAC contained in their 70 th Report on Failure to 
Implement Ministry of Railways Order resulted in Damage to Railway Cables: 
South Eastern Railway and West Central Railway; 
(xiii) 136th Report on Grant of Concession without the support of Declaration in 
Form ‘F’; 
(xiv) 137th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Observation/ 
Recommendations of PAC contained in their 66 th Report on Excesses over 
Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2020-21); 
(xv) 138th Report on Evasion of Tax Due to Suppression of Sales; 
(xvi) 139th Report on Loss of Revenue due to Running of Suvidha Express Trains: 
South Western Railway; 
(xvii) 140th Report on Manpower and Logistics Management in Delhi Police; 
(xviii) 141st R e p o r t  o n  L o s s  o f  R e v e n u e  D ue to Non-Registration of Lease 
Agreement; 
(xix) 142nd Report on National Social Assistance Programme; 
(xx) 143rd Report on Performance Audit on Schemes for Flood Control and Flood 
Forecasting; 
(xxi) 144th Report on Implementation of Phase-I of Bharatmala Pariyojana; 
(xxii) 145th Report on Measures underway for Transition in the Energy Sector; 
(xxiii) 146th Report on Subject specific Compliance Audit on GST Refunds; 
(xxiv) 147th Report on Short realization of Entry Fees and Licence Fees; 
(xxv) 148th Report on Short levy of tax and interest due to excess allowance of ITC 
on purchase of Capital Goods; 
(xxvi) 149th Report on Reforms in Banking Sector; 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(xxvii) 150th Report on Reforms in Insurance Sector; 
(xxviii) 151st Report on Performance Audit of Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri 
Jan Arogya Yojana; and 
(xxix) 152nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 69 th 
Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on the Issues Relating to Accounting of 
Cess/Levies. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, ... 
....(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will come to that. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have to inform hon.  Members that the Business Advisory 
Committee in its meetings held on 22
nd July, 2024 and 23 rd July, 2024, has allotted 
time for Government Legislative and other Business as follows:- 
  
 BUSINESS TIME 
ALLOTTED 
1. General Discussion on the Union Budget, 2024-25 
 
Twenty  
Hours 
2. General Discussion on the Bu dget for Union Territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir for 2024-25 
(1 and 2 to 
be discussed 
together) 
3. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills relating to the 
owing Demands, after they are passed by Lok Sabha:- 
(i) Demands for Grants for the year 2024-25 
(ii) Demands for Grants of the Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir for the year 2024-25 
 
 
 
Four Hours 
4. Consideration and return of the Finance (No.2) Bill, 2024, after it 
is introduced, considered and passed by Lok Sabha 
 
Four Hours 
 
  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
11

LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have to inform you that letters have been received 
from hon. Members, Dr. Dharmasthala Ve erendra Heggade and Shri Vaiko for grant 
of Leave of Absence from 22 nd July, 2024 to 5 th August, 2024, and from 22 nd July, 
2024 to 12 th August, 2024, respectively.  Dr.  Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade has 
sought Leave of Absence on personal reas ons while Shri Vaiko has sought Leave of 
Absence on medical grounds. 
Do they have the permission of the House for remaining absent for the duration 
of leave which they have sought? 
(No hon. Member dissented.) 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Permission to remain absent is granted. 
MOTION FOR ELECT
ION TO THE COMMITTEE ON WELFARE OF  
OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. L. Murugan to move a Motion for election of ten Members to the 
Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes. 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Lok Sabha that a 
Committee of both the Houses to be called the 'Committee on Welfare of 
Other Backward Classes (OBCs)' be constituted for the purposes set out in 
the Motion adopted by the Lok Sabha at its sitting held on 1
st July, 2024 and 
communicated to this House, and resolves that this House do join in the said 
Committee and proceed to elect, in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of the single tran sferable vote, ten 
Members from amongst the Members of this House to serve on the said 
Committee. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted.
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF 
SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES      
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. L. Muruga n to move the Motion for nomination of ten Members 
to the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.   
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY  OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
 
"That this House resolves that the Rajy a Sabha do join the Committee of both 
the Houses on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the 
term ending on 30.04.2025, and do pr oceed to elect, in accordance with the 
system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable 
vote, ten Members from amongst the Me mbers of the House to serve on the 
said Committee."          
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. L. Murugan to move the Motion for nomination of seven 
Members to the Committee on Public Accounts.   
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY  OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
 
"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Lok Sabha that the 
Rajya Sabha do agree to nominate seven Members from Rajya Sabha to 
associate with the Committee on Public  Accounts for the term ending on 
30.04.2025, and do proceed to elect, in  such manner as directed by the 
Chairman, seven Members from amongst the Members of the House to serve 
on the said Committee." 
 
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
 
 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
13

 
 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. L. Murugan to move the Motion for nomination of seven 
Members to the Committee on Public Undertakings.   
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY  OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
 
"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Lok Sabha that the 
Rajya Sabha do agree to nominate seven Members from Rajya Sabha to 
associate with the Committee on Public Undertakings for the term ending on 
30.04.2025, and do proceed to elect, in  such manner as directed by the 
Chairman, seven Members from amongst the Members of the House to serve 
on the said Committee." 
 
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this is regarding Rule 267; for your benefit, my 
observations on Rule 267 have been uploaded today for your consideration. I call 
upon you and I strongly urge you to seriou sly bestow your attention on the same. I 
reiterate that the leaders of the political partie s need to take a call on  the issue as it is 
becoming a routine, daily affair in every si tting of the House. I had already indicated 
that in the last 36 years, this mechanism ha s been allowed only on six occasions. It is 
only in exceptional circumstances that the same may be allowed. I need not 
emphasise that seeking susp ension of the proceedings of the House for taking 
business indicated is indeed a very seri ous matter. The notices filed today do not 
conform to the directives imparted by the Chair in this behalf and the same are not 
admitted.  
 
 
REGARDING MENTIONING OF STATES IN THE BUDGET AND OTHER MATTERS  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Matters raised wi th Permission. Do you want to say 
something?  Yes, the Leader of the Opposition.  …(Interruptions)…      
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सभापित महोदय, मȅ रूल  267 की बहस मȂ नहीं जाना 
चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक अब की िÎथित क्या है, आज िकस ढंग से लोक सभा और राज्य सभा चल रही 
हȅ और उसके  बारे मȂ बाहर हमारा इÇĢैशन क ैसा है, यह बात आप भी जानते हȅ और हम सब लोग 
भी जानते हȅ, तो मȅ उसमȂ जाना नहीं चाहत
ा हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: Ãलीज़ ...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: महोदय, मȅ िसफर् आपसे यही िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक कल जो बजट पेश हुआ, 
उस बजट मȂ िकसी Îटेट को क ु छ नहीं िमला, सबकी थाली खाली है और क ेवल दो की थाली मȂ ही 
पकौड़े और जलेबी है।...(Ëयवधान)... इन दोनȗ को छोड़कर िकसी को क ु छ नहीं िमला है।  सर, न 
तिमलनाडु को क ु छ िम
ला, न क ेरल को क ु छ िमला, न कणार्टक, महाराÍटर्, पंजाब, हिरयाणा, 
राजÎथान, छǄीसगढ़ और न ही िदÊली को क ु छ िमला। मȅ िकतनी Îटेट्स बताऊं । ओिडशा को भी 
क ु छ नहीं िदया गया है। मȅने ऐसा बजट कभी नहीं देखा है और यह िसफर् िकसी को खुश करने क े 
िलए, क ुसीर् बचाने क े िलए यह सब हुआ है। इसका हम खंडन करते हȅ। यिद इस ढंग से बजट पेश 
होगा... मȅ समझता हूं िक वे कणार्टक से आई हȅ,  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Si
r, let the hon. Finance Minister speak.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, वे कणार्टक से आई हȅ, तो हमारी अपेक्षा ऐसी  थी िक सबसे ज्यादा 
हमȂ ही िमलेगा, लेिकन हमȂ क ु छ नहीं िमला, तो इसका हम खंडन करȂगे, ĢोटेÎट करȂगे और सारी 
इंिडया पाटीर् एलायन्स, सारे कन्याकु मारी से लेकर कÌमीर तक...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir,
 let the hon. Finance Minister speak.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, मȅ बोल देता हूं...(Ëयवधान)... माताजी बोलने मȂ एक्सपटर् हȅ, मुझे 
मालूम है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: खरगे जी, ये माताजी नहीं, बिÊक ये तो आपकी बेटी क े बराबर हȅ।   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: इसिलए, मȅ इसका खंडन करता हूं। िजस-िजस जगह अपोिजशन पाट
ीर् 
चुनकर आई है, िजस-िजस जगह आपको नेगलेक्ट िकया गया है या लोगȗ ने आपको नकार िदया 
है, उस जगह क ु छ नहीं िमला। अग
र आप ऐसा ही करते गए, अगर बैलȂस नहीं होगा, तो 
डेवलेपमȂट क ै से होगा? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have made your point, Sir.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: आज लोग आपके  साथ हȅ, कल लोग दूसरे क े साथ हȗगे। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
15

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let the hon. Finance Minister speak.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: लोग तो अलग-अलग समय मȂ अलग-अलग क े साथ होते हȅ, इसिलए मȅ 
इसका खंडन करता हूं। हम सभी पाटीर् क े लोग इस टाइप क े attitude का खंडन करते हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have made your point.  Now, hon. Finance Minister.   
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE
; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, than k you for giving me an opportunity to 
respond.  ...(Interruptions)...  Much before I respond, they would like to make a lot 
of noise and go away.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: In the true spirit of democracy 
...(Interruptions)...  They don’t even want...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  
please.  ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, discussion on the Budget was listed for 
today. I gave floor to the Lead er of the Opposition in the expectation that rules will be 
followed.I find that it has been used as  a ploy and a strategy. Hon. Members, I 
strongly plead with you that democracy will be seriously threatened if disruption and 
disturbance are weaponised as a political st rategy as has been done now. Parliament 
is the citadel of constitutional and democrat ic values and liberties. I am aghast. As a 
matter of fact, during the day and the days following, we will have ample opportunities 
to reflect on the Budget presented by the hon. Finance Minister. There was absolutely 
no occasion, justification, even remotely, to  avail the facility accorded by me for this 
purpose. I cannot persuade my self but take serious exception to this unwholesome 
practice adopted by a senior Member, the Leader of the Opposition. I will call upon 
Leaders of the Parties to soul -search on my reflections on Rule 267 that in more than 
three decades, it has been availed only on  half a dozen occasions. And every day of 
the sitting, I get a number of such requests. It  is being taken as a routine exercise. As 
a habit, it has reduced itself to a farcical exercise. In spite of my serious observations 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
yesterday, since no focus has taken place, I have again uploaded the same on your 
portal. Now, hon. Finance Minister, on the observations made.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, than k you very much for giving me this 
opportunity. It is unfortunate. A senior l eader, the Leader of the Opposition, Shri 
Mallikarjun Kharge, stood up to say his vi ews on what he heard of the Budget 
yesterday.  I would think and maybe it is a bit too much to expect that in the honour of 
democracy, at least, the Opposition would have stayed here to listen to what I have to 
respond. The Leader of the Opposition raised issues on the Budget, which was 
presented yesterday and tabled in this Hous e yesterday. Just to the point that he 
raised that I have not named many States and probably spoke about only two States, 
there are a few points which I have to table here with your  permission, Sir. I have to 
voice a few points here, Sir, as to what happens in a speech. The Congress Party has 
been in power for a very long time in this  country. They presented so many different 
Budgets. And they would know clearly th at in every Budget, you don't get an 
opportunity to name every State of this co untry. I will take this example. Between 
Vote on Account, which was presented on 1 st February this year, and now the full 
Budget, which was presented yesterday, for this year, I have no t named very many 
States but let me take the name of Maharashtra, for instance. In Vote on Account and 
yesterday's Budget, I had not named Mahara shtra. Hence, I will take that as an 
example.  Under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi, the Cabinet has passed a very 
important decision. It has taken a decision to set up a very big port in Vadhavan in 
Maharashtra. Did Maharashtra get ignored because I did not mention the name of 
Maharashtra? An amount of Rs.76,000 crore has been announced for that project.  
Maharashtra's name was not taken in th e Vote on Account; nor was it taken 
yesterday. But does it mean that we have ignored Maharashtra? I can take the names 
of so many other different States where we have major projects. That is one.  
Second, if the speech does not mention the na me of a particular State, does it mean 
that the benefits of schemes of the Go vernment of India, programmes of the 
Government of India and the Externally Ai ded schemes, which we obtain from the 
World Bank, ADB, AIIB and such institutio ns like that, do not go to these States? 
They go as per routine and actually the Ex penditure Statement of the Government, 
the Department-wise allocation of the Gove rnment, clearly mentions all these item-
wise. This is a deliberate attempt, and I am saying this with responsibility. This is a 
deliberate attempt of the Opposition partie s led by the Congress Party to give an 
impression to the people that nothing has b een given to our States, that it has been 
given only to two States. I would challeng e the Congress Party, for all the Budget 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
17

 
 
Speeches that they have delivered, that in each of the Budget Speeches, have they 
named every State of this country? Th is is an outrageous allegation. 
...(Interruptions)...  And now that they have come here, now that TMC has come 
here, I would like to say ...(Interruptions)...   Now that there is  a Member trying to 
disrupt me, I would like to say that even  the schemes which have been given to 
Bengal...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Mr. Chairman, Sir, please allow me to say this.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on r ecord and no one should shout. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAM AN: Even the schemes wh ich were allocated to 
Bengal...(Interruptions)...  Sir, you have allowed me to speak. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please don't shout. ...(Interruptions)...  This is not a shouting 
place. ...(Interruptions)... Is it a shouting place? ...(Interruptions)... Dr. John 
Brittas, Shrimati Priyanka  Chaturvedi, Ms. Dola Sen,  you are senior Members. 
...(Interruptions)... No, no. ...(Interruptions)... T a k e  y o u r  s e a t s .  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, let me complete. ...(Interruptions)... I hope 
I am allowed to finish. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)...  Take 
your seats. ...(Interruptions)...   Hon. Members, please.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, let me finish.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. Finish it in two minutes.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Yes, I will speak on Bengal. I have already 
spoken on Maharashtra for the Members who chose to walk out of the House without 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
even listening to my reply. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, let me have some order in the 
House. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister, you will have ample opportunity to respond 
to each of them when you finally respond.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Yes, Sir, bu t this kind of a statement by a very 
senior Member of the House, the Leader of  the Opposition, I think, is not acceptable. 
...(Interruptions)...  Let me answer the Members from TMC.  ...(Interruptions)...   
Even yesterday, TMC questioned the Budget  saying that nothing has been given to 
Bengal. ...(Interruptions)...  Let me just highlight the fact that several schemes given 
by the hon. Prime Minister in the last te n years have not even been implemented in 
West Bengal. ...(Interruptions)...       
   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay Madam, thank you.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAM AN: Health insurance!  …(Interruptions)…  And you 
have the audacity to ask me now.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Bengal should correct its course.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, 'Matters Raised with Permission'.  
…(Interruptions)…  Shrimati Mausam Noor.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, one minute.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please.  …(Interruptions)…  No, no.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR (West Bengal): Si r, my Zero Hour today is 'Demand to 
take necessary steps to stop erosion by the Ganga river in Malda, West Bengal'. ..  
…(Interruptions)… 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
19

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We will wait for all these issues during the debate.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR: Sir, thank you fo r accepting my Zero Hour as the first 
notice.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats.  …(Interruptions)… I have allocated twenty 
hours.  …(Interruptions)…     
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Sir, how can Nirmala ji accuse the Bengal Government?  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  …(Interruptions)…  No.  …(Interruptions)…  What is 
this?  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: This is wrong. …(Interruptions)… You owe one lakh 
crore..…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Patel, please.  …(Interruptions)…  A l l  o f  y o u  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t s .   
…(Interruptions)…  T a k e  y o u r  s e a t s .   …(Interruptions)…  M r .  P a t e l ,  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   
…(Interruptions)…  Mr. Jairam, take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  Please take your 
seats.  …(Interruptions)…  You created chaos.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, 
just a minute.  …(Interruptions)…  Please allow me to speak.  …(Interruptions)…  Allow 
me to speak.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  A l l  o f  y o u  t a k e  y o u r  
seats.  …(Interruptions)…  Please, hon. Members.  …(Interruptions)…  Now, Shrimati 
Mausam Noor.  …(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR: Sir, my Zero Hour today.. …(Interruptions)…         
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. …(Interruptions)… Nothing has gone on record.  
…(Interruptions)… One minute. …(Interruptions)… Dr. Sasmit Patra, please.  
…(Interruptions)… Digvijaya ji, please.  …(Interruptions)… Digvijaya ji, please.  
…(Interruptions).. Hon. Minister. Please…  …(Interruptions)…  Interruptions)… I 
will...…(Interruptions)… Don't force my hands.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, 
please. …(Interruptions)… One minute. …(Interruptions)… Take your seat. 
  
…(Interruptions)…  Take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, hon. Minister, 
please. …(Interruptions)… Nothing will go on record, please. …(Interruptions)…  
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Nothing will go on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, I gave the floor to the 
Leader of the Opposition and he made his point.  Since the hon. Finance Minister had 
to say something, there is a right.  …(Interruptions)…  One minute.  The rest of you will 
have ample opportunity during the 20 hours, and I will increase the time also to 
accommodate others. …(Interruptions)… Let us set some example.  
…(Interruptions)…  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  The way we have done is not good.  
…(Interruptions)…  Shrimati Mausam Noor.  …(Interruptions)…  Yes, please hear.  
…(Interruptions)…  She is raising a good point.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR: Sir, my Zero Ho ur today is, Demand to take necessary 
steps to stop.. …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Why don't you hear the lady?  …(Interruptions)…  It is 'Demand to 
take necessary steps to stop erosion by the Ga nga river in Malda, West Bengal.'  It is 
a very important point. …(Interruptions)… Yes, Madam Mausam Noor. 
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Demand to take necessary steps to stop erosion by the Ganga river in Malda,  
West Bengal 
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR (West Bengal): Sir, thank you for accepting my Zero 
Hour as the first notice. You have been very generous. However, the Finance Minister 
has not been generous at all.  …(Interruptions)…  Zero has been given to Bengal in the 
Budget and zero has been given to battle th e floods of Malda. So, here I am in the 
Parliament speaking for the people of Malda Uttar and Malda Dakshin on behalf of the 
Trinamool Congress. …(Interruptions)…   
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 Every year, during the monsoon, Malda,  where I hail from, is devastated by 
major floods and erosions by the Rivers of  Ganga, Mahananda, Fulahar and Tangon 
but, this year, it is more alarming as, over the course of time, the rivers have changed 
its direction and the distance between the two major Rivers, Ganga and Fulahar, has 
come down to only 700 metres which was earlier almost eight kilometres apart. Sir, if 
these rivers merge, there will be a huge disaster causing colossal damage. Huge 
areas of lands will be engulfed by the ri vers. People will lose their lands, mango 
orchards, farming fields and the situatio n will render lakhs of people homeless.  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
21

 
 
Especially affected are the Blocks of Kaliachak 3, Kaliachak 2, Manikchak Ratua 1 
where the Ganga flows and Harischandrapur 2, Chachal 2 where the Fulahar flows.  
Sir, since this issue comes under the purvi ew of the Central Government, our hon. 
Chief Minister Ms. Mamata Banerjee has se veral times asked the Ministry of Water 
Resources and Farraka Barrage to conduct anti-erosion works and to come up with a 
permanent solution.  Specifically in February, 2022, she wrote to the Ministry of Water 
Resources requesting to restore the extended 120 kilometres jurisdiction of the 
Farakka Barrage Protection Authority. 
 Earlier, during the UPA regime, anti-erosion and bank protection works had 
been conducted several times in the affected areas. But,  unfortunately, since 2014, 
the Farakka Barrage has failed to combat the situation and take any major actions. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 Sir, I have also raised this matter several times in Zero Hour and also through 
Special Mention, and since the situation ha s turned extremely alarming as Ganga and 
Fulahar might merge and create havoc in th e afore-mentioned areas, through you, I 
once again appeal to the Government to l ook into this immediately. A permanent 
solution is needed and is need ed urgently. If this issue is not looked into, many lives, 
lands, public and private property will be lost forever. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh rimati Mausam Noor: Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala) , Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal),  
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala),  Sh ri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala),  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyan ka Chaturvedi  (Maharashtra), Ms. Dola 
Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Mah arashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal ), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shri 
Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shrima ti Mahua Maji (Jharkhand) and Ms. 
Sushmita Dev (West Bengal). 
Now, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal; Demand for justice for family of the victims of 
the 1985 Kanishka Bombing. 
 
Demand for justice to the family of the victims of the 1985 Kanishka Bombing 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब): उपसभापित महोदय, आज मȅ सदन क े समक्ष एक बहुत ही 
संवेदनशील और भावुक िवषय उठाना चाहता हूं। िपछले सतर् मȂ हमारी संसद ने उन सभी 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िविक्टÇस की याद मȂ Ǜǉांजिल अिर्पत की थी जो 1985 की किनÍका एयर बॉिंÇबग मȂ मारे गए थे।  
किनÍका एयर बॉिंÇबग, 9/11 हमल े से पहले तक, िवÌव का सबसे बड़ा एिवएशन अटैक था, 
िजसमȂ 23 जून, 1985 को एयर इंिडया Äलाइट 182 मȂ बम लगाया गया, िजसके  कारण सभ ी  329 
याितर्यȗ की मृत्यु हो गई थी, िजसमȂ 82 बच्चे भी थे। ये आंकड़े अपने आप को भयभीत करते हȅ, हम 
सबको भयभीत करते हȅ। यह हमला इतना भयानक था िक ÅलाÎट क े बाद जहाज एटलांिटक 
ओशन मȂ िगर गया, िज सक े  कारण बहुत सारे मृतकȗ की लाशȂ भी नहीं िमलीं और बहुत सारे 
पिरवार अपने िĢयजनȗ का अंितम संÎकार भी नहीं कर पाए।  
 सर, इस घटना को 40 वषर् होने जा रहे हȅ।  िपछले महीने जून, 2024 मȂ कनाडा सरकार ने 
बताया िक वे इस घटना की जांच कर रहे हȅ। शायद पूरे िवÌव मȂ इतनी लंबी इन्वेिÎटगेशन बहुत 
कम हुई होगी। कनाडा क े साथ हमारे अच्छे संबंध हȅ। मुझे शंका इस बात की भी होती है िक कनाडा 
अपने आप को डेवलÃड क ंटर्ी बोलता है, अपने आप
को डेमोकर्े िटक क ंटर्ी बोलता है, अपने आपको 
न्याय देने वाली क ंटर्ी बोलता है, अपनी पािर्लयामȂट मȂ टेरिरįम एक्ट को condemn करता है, 
लेिकन जो किनÍक एयरकर्ाÄट की Äलाइट उनकी अपनी जमीन से उड़ी, जो िक खुद िसक्योिरटी 
लैÃसेज़ क े िजÇमेवार थे, उस घटना क े िविक्टÇस को आज तक वे न्याय नहीं दे पा रहे हȅ। अचंिभत 
करने वाली बात यह भी है िक कनाडा ने अभी तक िसफर् एक Ëयिƪ को किन्वक्ट िक या है और 
उसमȂ सजा भी इतनी कम थी िक वह बाहर आ गया।           
 सर, मȅ पंजाब से आता हूं।  वहां क े बहुत से पिरवारȗ ने इस घटना मȂ अपने लोगȗ को खोया 
है, लेिकन आज 40 वष र् क े बाद भी इन मृतकȗ क े पिरव
ारȗ को न्याय नहीं िमला है। सर, मȅ अपने 
माननीय सभापित जी का िवशेष धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं िक उन्हȗने इन पिरवारȗ क े दुख और 
वेदना को समझा और इस सदन मȂ िपछले सतर् मȂ मौन रखवाया। उन्हȗने इस घटना का संज्ञान 
िलया और कहा िक िविक्टÇस को न्याय िमलना च
ािहए। ...(समय की घंटी)... सर, िसफर् आधा 
िमनट... * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। माननीय 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल जी, अब आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। It is not going on 
record. इसमȂ तीन िमनट का ही समय होता है।   
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar  Sircar (West Bengal), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri Jose K. 
Mani (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu),Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab).           
Now Shri Niranjan Bishi; demand for in creasing road infrastructure under the 
P.M.G.S.Y. Scheme.  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
23

Demand for increasing road infrastructure under the PMGSY scheme 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha): Sir, hon. ex -Chief Minister of Odisha, Shri Naveen 
Patnaik had raised concern over the inadeq uate financial support  from the Central 
Government in the field of road connectivity and infrastructure development of 
Odisha.  Despite numerous projects announced  by the Government of India including 
initiative for the construction of nation al highways and roads to enhance road 
connectivity, minimum progress has been made in confirming these commitments 
into tangible results.   
In addition to that, there has been a no ticeable decline in the length of road 
construction under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), a Centrally-
funded scheme over the years posing signifi cant challenges to the road infrastructure 
of Odisha. In response to these challenges , the then Odisha Government led by our 
ex-Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik, had initiated projects such as the State 
Highway Development Programme and Biju Expressway Yojana providing financial 
assistance for road construction. Moreover , the State Government led by our ex-
Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik, ha d earmarked funds for additional schemes 
aimed at transforming rural infrastructure . However, despite these endeavours, there 
remained a pressing need for increased intervention from the Government of India.  
Therefore, through you, Sir, I respectfu lly urge upon the Government of India 
to scrutinize this matter and allocate f unds and assistance immediately to ensure 
timely completion and enhancement of the road infrastructure, Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana in the State of Odisha. This  proactive intervention is crucial for 
addressing the deteriorating condition of  roads and fostering overall economic and 
social development in the State of Odisha. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Niranjan Bishi: Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shrimati Mamata  Mohanta (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shrimati Mausam Noor (West 
Bengal), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra).  
Now Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan; 'Concer n over navigational clearance in 
Brahmaputra river'.  
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

Concern over the navigational clearance in the Brahmaputra River 
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam): Sir, I thank you for allowing me to raise an 
important issue about Assam. I am a repres entative of the State of Assam through 
which the mighty river Brahmaputra is flow ing, dissecting the State from Sadiya to 
Dhubri, Bangladesh border. Traversing a di stance of 891 km, the Ministry of Shipping 
and Waterways has declared the above waterway as National Waterway No. 2.   
As per the Inland Waterways of Authority of India Act, 1985, IWAI is responsible 
for developing the waterway for naviga tion. The IWAI is carrying out various 
development works on the waterway to impr ove its navigability as laid down in the 
IWAI Act, 1985.  At present, the waterway is being used by vessels of the Government 
of Assam, the Army, Border Security Forc e, tourism organizations and other private 
operators.  Long cruise tourist vessels are making voyages between Pandu and Majuli 
Islands.  From October to May, our dimensional cargo is also transported through the 
waterway from time to time. 
Now, Sir, a new bridge over the ri ver Brahmaputra between Bharalumukh, 
Guwahati and North Guwahati is under co nstruction, obviously, which has many 
utilities.  However, the navigational clearance that is essential to run over-dimensional 
cargo may be a concern if the required clearance has not been maintained for the 
same.  Since it is a declared National Waterway clearance, no objection must be 
essential before construction of a bridge is taken up.  Th rough this mention, I urge 
upon the Minister concerned, who incidenta lly is also an elected representative of 
Assam, to come up with a detailed note or  statement to allay any misgivings in the 
minds of the people for apparent less na vigational clearance in comparison to 
Saraighat Bridge, which is ma jestically standing closel y to the new bridge under 
construction. Thank you, Sir.            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Be ngal), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik, (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Mah arashtra), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Jo hn Brittas (Kerala), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi, (Odisha), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
Thank you, Ajit ji.  Now, Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta; demand to expedite the 
work related to the establishment of AIIMS at Darbhanga, Bihar.  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
25

Demand to expedite the work related to the establishment of AIIMS at  
Darbhanga, Bihar 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा (िबहार): उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे सदन मȂ बोलने का अवसर देने क े िलए 
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
महोदय, मȅ िमिथला की बेटी हूँ और एक सामान्य पिरवार मȂ पली-बढ़ी हूँ। मȅने गरीबी को 
बहुत नजदीक से देखा है। मȅने Îवयं इस पीड़ा को महसूस िकया है िक क ै से िपछली सरकारȗ क े 
समय मȂ िबहार मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएँ लचर अवÎथा मȂ थीं। मȅने देखा है िक क ै से िबहार क े गरीब और 
दिलत Ëयिƪ इलाज क े िलए िदÊली एÇस मȂ परेशान होते हȅ। उनको एÇस क े बाहर फ ु टपाथ पर 
सोना पड़ता था, न खाने का िठकाना होता था, न सोने का। बार-बार िबहार स
े िदÊली और िदÊली 
से िबहार आने-जाने मȂ उनकी आिर्थक हालत खराब हो जाती थी। लेिकन उपसभापित महोदय, 
समाज क े गरीब, दिलत, िपछड़े और लाचार लोगȗ की िचन्त
ा करने वाले हमारे माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का मȅ ǭदय से धन्यवाद Ëयƪ करना चाहती हूँ, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने िबहार मȂ 
पटना क े बाद दूसरा एÇस दरभंगा िजले को िदया। इससे उǄर िबहार क े करोड़ȗ लोगȗ क
े  साथ-
साथ हमारे पड़ोसी राज्य पिÌचम बंगाल क े क ु छ क्षेतर्ȗ क े अलावा पड़ोसी देश नेपाल क े लोगȗ को 
भी ÎवाÎथ्य सुिवधाओं का लाभ िमलेगा। मȅ इसके  िलए तत्कालीन क े न्दर्ीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी का भी 
आभार Ëयƪ करती हूँ।   
महोदय, मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से हमारी सरकार से िवनĦ अनुरोध करना चाहती हूँ िक 
िमिथला क े दरभंगा मȂ ĢÎतािवत एÇस का िनमार्ण कायर् जÊद से जÊद Ģारंभ िकया  जाए, िजससे 
वहाँ की जनता को शीघर्ाितशीघर् ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाओं का लाभ िमल सके । साथ ही मȅ आदरणीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का धन्यवाद और आभार Ëयƪ करना चाहती हूँ िक इस शानदार बजट मȂ 
मिहलाओं, युवाओं, गरीब, शोिषत, दिलत... 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मैडम, जब आप बजट
 पर बोिलएगा, तब आप यह बोलȂ, Ãलीज़।  Thank 
you. 
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan : Dr. Fauzia Khan (Ma harashtra) and Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
Now, Shri Ramji; request to construc t Pachpedi Ghat Bridge at Lakhimpur 
Khiri, Uttar Pradesh. 
Request to construct Pachpedi ghat bridge in Lakhimpur Khiri, Uttar Pradesh 
Ǜी रामजी (उǄर Ģदेश): मान्यवर, मȅ लखीमपुर खीरी से आता हूँ। लखीमपुर खीरी एक तराई 
क्षेतर् ह
ै, यह एक काफी िपछड़ा क्षेतर् भी है और यहाँ क े लोग मोÎट्ली खेती पर िनभर्र करते हȅ।  
लेिकन मान्यवर, बरसात क े समय नेपाल क े पानी की वजह से वहाँ बाढ़ आती है, िजससे वहाँ की 
60 परसȂट आबादी Ģभािवत होती है, यहाँ की फसलȂ जलमग्न हो जाती
 हȅ, Îकू ल, कॉलेज, 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]
the   hon.   Member,   Shrimati  Dharmshila  Gupta:  Shri  Ajit  Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).

अÎपताल क े राÎते बंद हो जाते हȅ और लाखȗ लोग बेघर हो जाते हȅ। पिलया और लखीमपुर का 
लगभग 90 िकलोमीटर  का जो रेल का और रोड का संपकर् मागर् है, वह हर साल ट ू ट जाता है।  
इसिलए मान्यवर, वहाँ की जनता की एक लÇबे अरसे स े एक माँग रही है िक शारदा नदी पर 
पचपेड़ी घाट क े पुल का िनमार्ण कराया जाए।  यह आज से नहीं, बीसȗ साल से माँग रही है।  कई 
बार यह कहा गया िक वÊडर् बȅक से फाइनȂस हो गया, वहाँ पर नक्शा बनाया गया, टȂडर की 
Ģिकर्या शुरू  कर दी गई, लेिकन आज तक वहाँ पर पचपेड़ी घाट का पुल नहीं बनाया गया। अगर 
यह पचपेड़ी घाट का प
ुल बन जाता है, तो इससे वहाँ पर एक लंबे क्षेतर्फल मȂ बाढ़ का जो Ģकोप 
है, वह भी रुके गा। इससे सबसे बड़ी बात यह होगी िक िनघासन और पिलय
ा की जो दूरी है, वह 
करीब-करीब 30 िकलोमीटर कम हो जाएगी। इसके  साथ ही हमारा जो नेपाल का बॉडर्र एिरया है, 
वह भी हमारे िलए सामिरक दृिÍटकोण से बेहतर होगा, क्यȗिक बरसात क े समय पिलया का राÎत
ा 
बंद हो जाता है और हमारा कोई संपकर् नहीं रहता है। अगर यह पुल बन जाता है, तो हमारी पहुँच 
नेपाल तक होगी, इसिलए यह सामिरक दृिÍटकोण से भी महत्वपूणर् है।   
मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से यह अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ िक पचपेड़ी घाट 
पुल का िनमार्ण कराया जाए और ऐसा करके  लखी
मपुर की जनता पर उपकार िकया जाए। वहाँ 
की जनता की लंबे अरसे से यही माँग है। मȅ आपसे यही कहना चाहता हूँ, धन् यवाद। 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Ramji: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Jo hn Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN
Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu).
The next speaker is Shrimati Rajani Asho krao Patil; Demand to reduce rate of 
GST on Mediclaim policies.  
Demand to reduce rate of GST on Mediclaim Policies 
SHRIMATI RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL (Maharasht ra): Sir, I would like to state about 
a very important issue regarding the health sector of India. Sir, GST on luxury goods 
like gold, silver, diamond is restricted to three per cent whereas for the services of 
medical importance and necessities, it is kept at 18 per cent, for example, life 
insurance and mediclaim insurance policies. This clearly shows that the Government 
is least bothered about public health ca re matters. Due to such heavy taxes, the 
common people avoid taking mediclaim insurance policies and ends up paying their 
hospital bills in lakhs. Our country had alre ady experienced this at the time of Covid 
pandemic in 2019, where common man had to sell his property to pay the hospital 
bills as he was not covered under the medical  insurance policy. It is recommended to 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
27

 
 
cut down the GST rates on mediclaim insu rance policies. This will encourage the 
common man to insure his life by taking mediclaim policies.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil: Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bish i (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra ), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri A.  A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), 
Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Pr akash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Mausam Noor (West Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal), Shri Shaktisinh Gohil (Gujarat), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasth an), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), 
Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Anil Kuma r Yadav (Telangana), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu) and Shri Sanjeev Arora, (Punjab). 
The next speaker is Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao  Bonde; Request to confer Bharat 
Ratna to Late Dr. Panjabrao Shamrao Desh mukh for his great contribution to the 
country especially in the field of education and agriculture.  
 
Request to confer Bharat Ratna to Late Dr. Panjabrao Shamrao Deshmukh for his 
great contribution to the country especially in the field of education and agriculture 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्): आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका ध्यान 
Îवगीर्य डॉ. पंजाबराव उपाख्य बहुसेव शामराव देशमुख क े िशक्षा, सामािजक और क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ 
महान योगदान की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहत
ा हूँ। वे भारत मȂ एक Ģमुख सामािजक कायर्कतार् 
और िकसानȗ क े नेता थे। उन्हȗने पं. जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी की क ैिबनेट मȂ क ृिष मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ 
काम िकया था। भारत मȂ Ģथम अंतर
ार्Íटर्ीय क ृिष Ģदशर्नी और हिरत कर्ांित मȂ उनका योगदान 
सराहनीय तथा अिवÎमरणीय था। उन्हȗने वषर् 1932 मȂ िशवाजी िशक्षण संÎथान की Îथापना की।  
उनके  ǎारा Îथािपत िशवाजी िशक्षण संÎथान क े अंतगर्त 24 िडगर्ी कॉलेज, 54 इंटरमीिडएट 
कॉलेज, 75 Îकू ल, 25 छातर्ावास, मेिडकल कॉलेज, लॉ कॉलेज और इंजीिनयिंरग कॉलेज 
संचािलत िक
ए जाते हȅ।  अकोला क े शासकीय क ृिष िवÌविवǏालय का नाम डॉ. पंजाबराव देशमुख 
क ृिष िवǏापीठ रख कर भी उन्हȂ सÇमािनत िकया गया है। उन्हȗने भारतीय संिवधान क े िनमार्ण मȂ 
भी महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभ
ाई है और आजाद िंहद सेना क े िलए बचाव पक्ष क े वकील क े रूप  मȂ भी 
काम िकया है। उन्हȗने अÎपृÌयता क े िलए भी काम िकया है। अमरावती क े अÇबादेवी मंिदर मȂ 
अछू तȗ को Ģवेश की अनुमित देने क े िलए सत्यागर्ह िकया है। इस वषर् पूरा भारत डॉ. पंजाबराव 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
देशमुख जी की 125वीं जयंती मना रहा है। चूँिक डॉ. पंजाबराव शामराव देशमुख ने देश मȂ िशक्षा, 
क ृिष, संसदीय तथा सामािजक क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान िदया है, इसिलए मȅ उन्हȂ 'भारत रत्न' 
से सÇमािनत करने का अनुरोध और आगर्ह करता हूँ, धन्यवाद । 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra). 
The next speaker is Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar; Demand to release the funds for 
the Chennai Metro Rail project, Phase-II.  
 
Demand to release the funds for the Chennai Metro Rail project, Phase-II 
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR (Tamil Nadu): Respected Deputy Chairman Sir, I bring 
to your kind notice that in Budget speech of 2021-2022, the hon. Finance Minister of 
the Union Government announced a budget allocation of Rs. 63,246 crores for the 
second phase of the Chennai Metro Rail Pr oject. As recommended by the Public 
Investment Board on August 17, 2021. Howe ver, this project has been waiting the 
approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic  Affairs for the last three years. As a 
result, the entire expenditure is being born e by the State. This delay is severely 
impacting the State finances. Sir, I raised a question on the same issue to the hon. 
Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs for which I received a reply stating that the 118.9 
kilometre Chennai Metro Rail Phase 2 proj ect is currently under process and its 
approval depends upon the feasibility of the project. In this matter, I would like to 
submit that the population of Chennai metro city is approximately 1.2 crores, which is 
huge in size. The condition of traffic in Che nnai city is quite hectic because of high 
population, which is 26,000 pe ople per square kilometre.  Similar other cities, like 
Delhi and Bengaluru, which have a large po pulation, have excelle nt metro network.  
Additionally, the floating population of Ch ennai settles around 25 kilometres on daily 
basis, which is on par with other metro cities.   
 Sir, the hon. Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu has reiterated his request for the 
release of funds. In the light of this, I respectfully make a request to the Union 
Government to allocate the previously-announced funds for the Chennai Metro Rail – 
Phase II Project.   
 Sir, the Union Government should treat  all the States equally like a ‘mother-
bird’.    
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
29

 
 
Demand to declare Rath Yatra of Mahaprabhu Shri Jagannath as a National Holiday 
 
Ǜी शुभाशीष खुंिटया (ओिडशा): जय जगन्नाथ!  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I would like to 
thank you for giving me this opportunity to draw the attention of the Government with 
a demand to declare Rath Yatra of Mahaprabhu Shri Jagannath as a National Holiday.  
 Sir, Lord Mahaprabhu Shri Jagannath is  the Lord of the Un iverse. Every year, 
people from across the world -- irrespective of caste, colour, religion, and faith -- 
flock to Odisha on the occasion of Car Festival to have a darshan of Mahaprabhu Shri 
Jagannath, Sri Balabhadra, Maa Subhadra, an d Sri Sudarshan on the open chariot. 
The festival attracts millions of devotees an d is renowned for its vibrant rituals and 
cultural significance, marking the largest ch ariot festival in the world. It has got 
recognition as one of the oldest Hindu festiv al worldwide.  Even people are observing 
the car festival in different places of the world. Given the festival’s widespread appeal 
and its role in promoting cultural awarenes s and national unity, I firmly believe that 
declaring the Car Festival as a National Holiday would be a fitting tribute to our shared 
heritage.  Such a declaration would allow citizens from all walks of life to participate in 
the celebrations, deepening their connection to our cultural roots and strengthening 
the sense of national pride. Furthermore, r ecognizing the Car Fest ival as a national 
holiday would underscore the Government’s commitment to preserving and 
promoting our cultural heritage.  
 In view of the above, on behalf of th e people of Odisha, I urge upon the hon. 
Minister of Culture to consider this requ est and take necessary steps to declare the 
Car Festival as a National Holiday. Your support in this matter would be greatly 
appreciated by millions of devotees and cu ltural ethos across the nation. Thank you, 
Sir. वन्दे उत्कल जननी! 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय शुभाशीष खुंिटया जी। जो लोग एसोिसएट करना चाहते हȅ, वे 
अपने नाम यहाँ िलिखत रूप  मȂ भेज दȂ। माननीय Ǜी ईर
ण्ण कडाडी, ‘Demand for Inquiry into 
Financial Irregularities by Karnataka Government’. 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश(कनार्टक): सर, यह िवषय नहीं िलया जा सकता। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़। 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, यह िवषय नहीं िलया जा सकता। ...(Ëयवधान)...यह रूÊस क े िखलाफ है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is listed.  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Chairman has listed 
it here.  ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश:  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: यह िवषय िलÎटेड है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसको माननीय चेयरमैन ने िलÎट िकया 
है, यह िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Now, Shri Iranna Kadadi. 
 
Demand for inquiry into the financial irregularities by the Karnataka Government 
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी (कनार्टक): उपसभापित महोदय, आज मȅ अपनी बात कन्नड़ मȂ कहना चाहता 
हूँ। † "Sir, I want to draw the attention of th e Government and this House towards the 
187 crore rupees scam, which occurred in th e State of Karnataka in regard to the 
funds of Maharishi Valmiki Scheduled Tribe Development Corporation. The funds 
earmarked for the welfare activities of the downtrodden people, were 
misappropriated. 
For the last one-year, members are not being appointed to this organization. 
The basic facilities are not being provided . The Dalit students residing in the 
Corporation’s Hostels are not being provided with the basic facilities. Tube wells are 
not being installed on the lands belongin g to the Scheduled Tribes. The Scheduled 
Tribes people engaged in small busine sses are not being given any financial 
assistance. The funds allotted for the development of the Scheduled Tribes have been 
systematically looted. Such a serious scam came to light only after a suicide note, left 
by an officer of this Valmiki Corporation, was found. The Secret ary of the Scheduled 
Tribes Welfare Department has already resigned as he was arrested by the 
Enforcement Directorate (E.D).  The ED officials have raided 20 different locations in 
Karnataka. The SIT has arrested 15 people in this case. ...(Interruptions)... 
Sir, the misappropriated funds have b een transferred to 270 Benami Accounts 
in the States of Karnataka,  Andhra Pradesh and Telangana and a sum of rupees 40 
crores has already been confiscated. A we ll-planned mechanism is being used to 
spread the rumors that the Central Govern ment is against the Minorities, Dalits and 
the Backward Castes." ...(Interruptions)... 
 
                                                            
 Not recorded.  
† English translation of the original speech delivered in Kannada. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
31

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िसफर् माननीय ईरण्ण कडाडी जी की बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह िलÎटेड है। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
SHRI IRANNA KADADI: "It has been wrongly stated that this Government is doing 
away with reservation and that the Constitution is under threat. Now they themselves 
are misappropriating the funds allocated for the welfare of the Dalits and the 
Scheduled Tribes. They have misused these funds for the election expenditure of their 
party candidates in the Lok Sabha elections, which is a serious betrayal of the Dalits 
and the Scheduled Tribes. They are making all possible attempts to influence the 
investigation process of the ED  by politicizing the issue. I demand a fair investigation 
by the CBI in this scam, which is nothin g but a dacoity committed in broad daylight, 
of the funds allocated for the welfare of the Dalits.  
Through you, I would like to request that  the culprits be brought to book and 
justice be meted out to the Dalits and th e Backward Castes, whose money has been 
misappropriated.  Namaskar!" 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Iranna Kadadi: Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri M. Mohame d Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Narayana Koragappa, (Karnataka). 
This is listed. माननीय चेयरमैन ने इसे approve िकया है। ...(Ëयव
धान )... Please take 
your seats ...(Interruptions)... माननीय एलओपी। 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, मȅ आपसे िवनती करता हूं िक जो िवषय राज्य का है, 
राज्यȗ मȂ जो घटनाएं होती हȅ, उनके  बारे मȂ वहां की असेÇबली मȂ वहां क े मेÇबसर् उठा सकते हȅ, 
लेिकन वहां सरकार क े जो administrative
 lapses हȅ, अगर आपने उन्हȂ यहां उठाने की परिमशन 
दी, तो हम रोज़ ऐसे िवषय उठाएंगे, दूसरे Îटेट्स मȂ िजतने मडर्सर् हो रहे हȅ या अन्य कोई घटनाएं 
हो रही हȅ... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: डा. लÑ
मीकान्त बाजपेयी। ...(Ëयवधान)... Nothing else is going on record. 
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee.  …(Interruptions) 
 
 
Concern over increasing number of deaths due to dog bites  
 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका ध्यान एक 
अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् समÎया की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूं। िवÌव ÎवाÎथ्य संगठन का कहना है िक 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
भारत मȂ dog biting से 36 परसȂट मृत्यु हो रही हȅ, वह भी 15 साल  क े बच्चȗ की मृत्यु हो रही है। 
इसके  िलए भारतीय पशु कÊयाण बोडर् ने यह कहा था िक इनकी जनगणना कराकर नसबंदी 
करानी चािहए, लेिकन उस संबंध मȂ अब तक कोई कायर्वाही नहीं हुई है। मेरा यह कह ना है िक 
भारतीय पशु कÊयाण बोडर् ने जो राय दी है, उसका पालन िकया जाना चािहए। अÎपतालȗ मȂ एंटी 
रेबीज़ वैक्सींस की पयार्Ãत ËयवÎथा होनी चािहए। आवारा क ुǄȗ को इंजेक्शन लगाकर उनके  काटने 
से होने वाले नुकसान से बच्चȗ को बचाया जा
ना चािहए।  
मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से यह आगर्ह करना चाहता हूं िक अÎपतालȗ मȂ पयार्Ãत एंटी 
रेबीज़ वैक्सीन की ËयवÎथा की जाए, आवारा क ुǄȗ की नसबंदी करके  उनको टीका लगाया जाए 
और पालतु पशुओं को भी टीका लगाने का काम िक
या जाए। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Dr . Laxmikant Bajpayee: Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadi k (Maharashtra), Shri Jose K. Mani 
(Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjeev Arora (P unjab), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha) and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).        
 Now, Shri Jose K. Mani. 
 
Concern over emerging threats and potential risks associated with Artificial 
Intelligence 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI (KERALA): Sir, I urge the Government to formulate a 
comprehensive legislation to regulate to prev ent the dangers associated with Artificial 
Intelligence in our country. AI is very much a part of our present reality. Soon, it will be 
the part of every person’s daily life and d ecision-making process. However, there are 
inherent dangers and significant risks associated with AI. The risks associated with AI 
are not limited to individuals; they extend to  society as a whole. The foremost issue is 
the case of data privacy. AI systems rely on  vast amount of data to learn, adapt and 
make decisions.   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
This data often includes sensitive person al information which, if not properly 
protected, can lead to severe privacy violations. ….(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Don’t shout. Use low decibel. 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
33

 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI: AI-powered tools can extract sensitive information from data 
base, social media accounts or online platform without obtaining proper consent.  
This not only breaches individual privacy ri ghts but also exposes them to potential 
financial and personal problems. AI system can analys e and combine data from 
multiple sources creating deta iled profiles of individuals without their knowledge or 
consent. This pervasive surve illance can lead to loss of au tonomy and control of our 
personal information. Biased AI system trained on biased data can perpetuate and ... 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  
The following hon. Members associated  with the matter raised by hon. 
Member, Shri Jose K. Mani : Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Sa ndosh Kumar P. (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haqu e (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal ), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati 
Mausam Noor (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bisi (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Ravi Chandra Va ddiraju (Telangana), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Keral a) and Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West 
Bengal) and Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand). 
Now  Question Hour. ...(Interruptions)....  
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Sir, I have a point of order. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Member, Shri Pramod 
Tiwari has a point of order. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JOSE. K. MANI:  Sir, ... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No. ...(Interruptions)... Question Hour has to start at noon. 
...(Interruptions)... You are one of the very se nior Members of the House. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI: 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)...  
                                                            
 Not recorded.  
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): रूल 238 (3) मȂ संसद की सभाओं या िकसी राज्य िवधान-मण्डल 
दल क े आचरण या कायर्वाही क े िवषय मȂ क्षोभकारी पदावली का उपयोग नहीं होगा।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मेरी बात तो सुिनए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will look into the entire record. You have raised a good point of 
order, and you will get my ruling.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: ठीक है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will look into it and give my ruling latest by tomorrow. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIR
AM RAMESH (Karnataka): Sir, please don’t mention my name in your 
ruling. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question Hour.   
 
Tourism in U.T. of Jammu and Kashmir 
 
†*16.  DR. DINESH SHARMA: Will the Minist er of HOME AFFAIRS be pleased to 
state: 
 
(a) whether the tourism sector in U.T. of Jammu and Kashmir has grown rapidly 
after August, 2019; 
(b) if so, the details thereof ; 
(c) the efforts that are being made by Govern ment to develop tourism in U.T. of    
Jammu and Kashmir; and 
 (d) the outcomes thereof? 
 
                                                            
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
35

 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI NITYANAND 
RAI): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the table of the house. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) The tourism sector in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir has witnessed 
unprecedented growth post abr ogation of Art. 370. The details of total tourist visits, 
year-wise as under:  
 
Year Total Tourist Visits 
2020* 34,70,834 
2021 1,13,14,884 
2022 1,88,64,332 
2023 2,11,24,674 
2024 1,08,41,009 (till June,2024) 
   Source: Government of Union Territory of J&K 
* Due to COVID, the footfall witnessed a decline.  
 
(c)  The Government of Jammu and Kashmi r has reported that several measures 
have been taken that led to significant improvement in the tourism sector such as:  
i. The Government has notified Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Policy- 2020. 
ii. Provided the status of industry to th e Tourism Sector for availing incentives 
under the Jammu and Kashmir Industrial Policy- 2021. 
iii. Notified the Homestay guidelines to accommodate increasing number of 
tourists and to give benefits to the locals from the economic gains of the 
Tourism Sector.  
iv. The Government has notified Jammu and Kashmir Film Policy- 2021. 
v. Notified Houseboat Policy - 2020.  
vi. Identified 75 off-beat destinations.  
vii. Border Tourism has picked up in J&K and hitherto unknown locations have 
been opened up for tourism viz. Gurez, Keran, Teetwal and R S Pura.   
viii. UT of J&K is also emerging in adventure and Golf tourism.  
ix. The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has undertaken various 
infrastructure projects to boost the tourism sector.  
x. UT of J&K is emerging as an international tourist destination after successful 
hosting of major events such as the 3
rd G-20 Tourism Working Group 
Meeting. 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
xi. Modern infrastructure and growing numbe r of luxury hotels and resorts make 
J&K a prime location for destinat ion weddings and MICE (Meetings, 
Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions) tourism.  
 
(d) The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has reported that due to above 
initiatives, the contribution of Tourism in  Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) has 
increased from 7.84% in FY 2019-20 to 8.47% in FY 2022-23. The tourism sector 
has recorded an annual average growth rate of 15.13% during the last 03 years.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question No.16.  Supplementary No.1, Dr. Dinesh Sharma.  
 
डा. िदनेश शमार्: महोदय, क्या जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ Ģधानमंतर्ी पैक े ज लागू िकया गया है? क्या उससे 
जÇमू-कÌमीर क े िवकास को गित िमल पा रही है और अभी िÎथित क्या है,  मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
जानना चाह
ता हूं।   
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Saket, I will name you now. Don’t disturb the House. It is going 
peacefully. …(Interruptions)… No, please. …(Interruptions)… I will request the floor 
leader to control the Member. Please.  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, जÇमू-कÌमीर क े िलए Ģधानमंतर्ी पैक े ज 2015 से Ģारंभ िकया गया 
और इसके  तहत भारत सरकार क े 15 मं तर्ालयȗ ǎारा 58,477 करोड़ का Ģावधान करके  वहां क े 
िवकास को गित दी जा रही है। उसमȂ 53 पिरयोजनाओ ं को चालू िक
या गया और उसमȂ 35 
पिरयोजनाएं पूरी हो गई हȅ या पूरी होने की िÎथित मȂ आ गई हȅ।  सर, इन 53 पिरयोजनाओं से वहां 
क े िवकास को गित िमली है, उसमȂ िबजली, ÎवाÎथ्य, िशक्षा, पयर्टन, क ृिष और कौशल िवकास 
आिद क े क्षेतर् शािमल हȅ।   
महोदय, िव
कास पैक े ज न क ेवल तत्काल जरूरतȗ को पूरा कर रहा है, बिÊक क्षेतर् मȂ सतत 
िवकास और िÎथरता का आधार भी बन रहा है। वहां पीएमडीपी योजना क े तहत एÇस, 
आईआईएम-जÇमू, आईआईटी-जÇमू, Ëयापक बाढ़ Ģबंधन कायर्कर्म, झेलम, चेनानी-नाशरी खंड 
सुरंग पिरयोजना, काजीगुंड-बिनहा
ल खंड सुरंग पिरयोजना आिद जैसी Ģमुख पिरयोजनाओं को 
पूरा िकया गया है। इसके  साथ ही पीओजेक े से िवÎथािपत और वैÎट पािकÎतान से आए हुए 
शरणािर्थयȗ को भी इस पैक े ज का लाभ िमल रहा है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: सेक Ȃ ड सÃल
ीमȂटरी, डा. िदनेश शमार्। And you should be satisfied with the 
first. Second supplementary.  
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
37

 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार्: सर, मȅ गृहमंतर्ी जी को बधाई देना चाहूंगा िक उन्हȗने शांित बहाली और 
बेरोजगारी दूर करने क े िलए काम िकया। मेरा दूसरा ĢÌन है िक छह हजार कÌमीरी पंिडतȗ को 
नौकरी और आवास देने क े संबंध मȂ क्या Ģगित हुई है?  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। It is a pointed question.  
 
Ǜी िनत्यान
न्द राय: महोदय, यह दुभार्ग्य रहा है िक एक समय मȂ कÌमीर मȂ िंहदुओं को बहुत 
Ģतािड़त िकया गया।  इतनी आपरािधक घटनाएं हुईं, हत्याएं भी बड़ी तादाद मȂ हुईं, आगजनी हुई, 
मिहलाओं क े साथ बलात्
कार हुए और एक सािजश क े तहत, िजनको वोट से मतलब था, िजन्हȗने 
िघनौनी राजनीित को आधार बनाया, ऐसे लोगȗ क े कारण वहां क े कÌमीरी पंिडतȗ का पलायन 
हुआ था। सर, जैसे माननीय सदÎय का क्वेÌचन है िक वहां छह हजार टर्ांिजट आवास बनाए गए 
हȅ। कÌमीर मȂ पीएम पैक े ज क े तहत लगे कÌमीरी िव
Îथािपत सरकारी कमर्चािरयȗ को 
समािनयोिजत करने क े िलए भारत सरकार ने 2015 क े दौरान कÌमीर घाटी क े िविभन्न िजलȗ मȂ 
छह हजार टर्ांिजट आवास क े िनमार्ण को भी मंजूरी दी है। सर, यह िनमार्ण की वतर्मान िÎथित है। 
िनिर्मत िकए जाने वाले Äलैटȗ की संख्या क ु ल 6,000 है, पूणर् िकए गए Äलैटȗ की संख्या 2,088 है, 
शेष Äलैटȗ क े िनमार्ण का कायर् Ģग
ित पर है। सभापित महोदय, जहां तक इन्हȗने नौकिरयȗ की 
बात कही है, तो कÌमीर घाटी मȂ कÌमीरी िवÎथािपत, कÌमीरी पंिडतȗ और िंहदुओं की वापसी और 
पुनवार्स की सुिवधा क े िलए पीएमडीपी, 2015 क े तहत भारत सरकार ने कÌमीरी िवÎ थािपतȗ क े 
अितिरƪ 3,000 पदȗ को सृिजत िकया और अब तक क ु ल 6,000 पदȗ मȂ से 5,724 पदȗ क े िलए 
उÇमीदवारȗ की िनयुिƪ कर दी गई है तथा शेष 276 पदȗ को पूरा भरा जा रहा है।  
       सभापित महोदय, इस Ģकार से वहां पूरा ख्याल रखा जा रहा है, चाहे उनका पुनवार्स हो, 
उनको नौकरी िमले, वहां पर शांित बहाल हो, वहां पर उस िÎथित मȂ लोग वापस हो रहे हȅ, उनका 
मनोबल बढ़ा है। आज हम यह कह सकते हȅ िक जो भी Ëयिƪ िवÎथािपत हुए हȅ, आने वाले भिवÍय 
मȂ हम उनका पुनवार्स और उनको नौकरी देने का का
म करȂगे।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Fauzia Khan. ...(Interruptions)... Please. Hon. Members, if 
you would have carefully gone through the re ply, I am sure you would be happy to 
note -- I don't want to reflect on details -- that last year we had two crore tourists; 
this time, before June, as per the reply, we  have already crossed the half-way mark.  
Dr. Fauzia Khan. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, before  I ask my question, I would like to draw your attention 
to the digital dashboard here. We are not ge tting any replies to the questions here on 
the dashboard. We should get to see the re plies here before we put a supplementary 
question. Regarding this Question, the Minist er has said that the tourism sector has 
grown, but I would like to point out that it has remained unregulated… 
 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute, hon. Member . I myself check and the replies are 
loaded. They are loaded, Madam. You only  have to operate it. All are loaded.  
Otherwise, how would I know? 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: No, Sir. It is not there on my dashboard. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Doesn't matter. Just have a cup of coffee with me  in my Chamber.  
Things will be sorted out. Your supplementary now. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN:  All right, Sir. Thank you. 
Sir, my point is that tourism remains unregulated and such unregulated tourism 
in an ecologically fragile ecosystem has resulted in increasing pollution in the water 
bodies and generation of huge amounts of waste and greenhouse gases like Carbon-
dioxide. What measures are being taken to  ensure sustainable tourism development 
in the region? Is the Government planning to develop a specific eco-tourism policy in 
the Union Territory based on sustainable models? 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय सदÎया को बताना चाहूंगा िक 2023 मȂ  2 
करोड़ 11 लाख पयर्टक गए हȅ। वहां पर सफाई और Îवच्छता की पूरी ËयवÎथा की जा रही है। वहां 
पर शांित का माहौल है, तभी आज वहां पर कई गुना पयर्टकȗ की संख्या बढ़ी है। वहां पर Îवच्छता 
का पूरा ख्याल रखा जा रहा है। हम थो
ड़े िदन पहले Ǜीनगर और आसपास क े कई िजलȗ मȂ गए थे। 
वहां पर पयर्टकȗ का पूरी तरह से ख्याल रखा जा रहा है।  
          सर, वहां पर Îवच्छता क े माध्
यम से जो हमारे कायर्कर्म चल रहे हȅ, उनके  माध्यम से वहां 
पर पयार्वरण का भी पूरा ख्याल रखा जा रहा है। Îवच्छता अ िभयान  क े िलए जÇमू-कÌमीर का 
Ģशासन काम पर लगा है। गृह मंतर्ालय ने भी उसको ÎपÍट रूप  से िनदȃश िदया है। लेिकन माननीय 
सदÎय महोदया का जो क्वेÌचन है, उससे तो यह भाव उत्पन्न हो रहा है िक शायद वे जÇमू-
कÌमीर क े पयर्टन को बढ़ावा नहीं देना चाहती हȅ। क्या वे चाहती हȅ िक वहां पर पयर्टक नहीं जाएं।  
....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिह
ल: सर, माननीय मंतर्ी जी....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िदग्वजय िंसह: सर, माननीय मंतर्ी जी माननीय  सदÎया क े िलए ....(Ëयव
 धान)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: इसिलए वे कह रही हȅ । ....(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
39

 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, वहां इस Ģकार से ....( Ëयवधान)... महोदय, वहाँ पयार्वरण पर इसके  
संभािवत Ģभाव का आकलन करने क े िलए पयर्टन से संबंिधत िवकास योजनाओं को मंजूरी देने से 
पहले गहन पयार्वरण Ģभाव का िवÌलेषण िकया जाता है। महो दय , Ëयापक िनयामक ढांचे और 
िविनयम पयर्टन िवकास की िदशा तय करते हȅ तथा अनुमेय भूिम, उपयोग िनमार्ण, िदशा िनदȃश 
और पयार्वरणीय मानकȗ को भी देखा जाता है। इसके  साथ ही Îथानीय समुदाय भी िनणर्य लेने की 
Ģिकर्याओं मȂ सिकर्य रूप  से भाग लेते हȅ, िजससे उनके  अपने सांÎकृ ितक मूÊय और पारंप
िरक ज्ञान 
अक्षुण्ण रहȂ। महोदय, वहाँ पर िनयिमत िनगरानी और सख्त Ģबंधन तंतर् क े माध्यम से पयार्वरण क े 
िनयमȗ  और नैितक पयर्टन पिरपािटयȗ का अनुपालन भी सुिनिÌ चत िकया गया है।  
महोदय, िहतधारकȗ क े िलए िनरंतर क्षमता िनमार्ण कायर्कर्म, पयर्टकȗ हेतु जागरूकता  
अिभयान क े साथ-साथ पिरपािटयȗ और पयार्वरण क े सारे िसǉांतȗ का भी ख्याल रखा जाता है 
और इसके  िलए जागृित भी पैदा की जाती है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, no Member  of the House is against wholesome 
activities in
 Jammu and Kashmir. So, to that  extent, I will look into hon. Minister’s 
observation. Hon. Member, Dr. Fauzia Khan, has always been contributing 
constructively. Now, Shri Pramod Tiwari. Tiwari ji, keep the tempo of decorum. You 
are a very senior man. And, please put pointed question.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, जैसा आप चाहते हȅ, वैसा ही होगा। सर, मȅ  माननीय मंतर्ी जी से Ãवाइंिटड 
क्वेÌचन पूछना चाहता हूं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  But, point towards me.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मȅ आप ही को एडर्ेस कर रहा हूं।  
 महोदय, अगर उनके  पास जवाब है, तो यह बता दȂ िक िपछले दस िदनȗ क े अंदर सीमा पर 
 अगर उनके  पास जवाब नहीं है, तो कोई बात नहीं है। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Pramodji, you are a senior man.   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मंतर्ी जी इतना ही बता दȂ िक क्या आतंकवादी गितिविधयाँ  ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I don’t expect this from you.  ...(Interruptions)... One second. 
...(Interruptions)... Only Mr. Tiwari will speak. Eve ryone else will take seat.   
Pramodji, I appeal to you to please confine to the question.  It is regarding tourism in 
the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. ...(Interruptions)...  And, if you have 
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
gone through the reply, you will find some thing enriching for us, soothing for us, 
wholesome for us.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please ask the supplementary.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मȅ पूरा कर लेता हूं। मȅ Ãवाइंिटड क्वेÌचन पूछ रहा हूं।  ..(Ëयवधान)...सर, मȅ 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक सीधा सवाल पूछ रहा हूं िक जब कोई ट ूिरÎट जाता है, तो उस क े  िदमाग 
मȂ सबसे बड़ी िंचता सुरक्षा की होती है। ...(Ëयवधान)...मȅ यही कह रहा हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: एक सेक ं ड रुिकय े, आप अपना ĢÌन पूिछए। .(Ëयवधान).... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से िसफर् इतना जानना चाहता हूं िक   ..(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, this will not go on record. ...(Interruptions)... माननीय मंतर्ी जी, 
Ģमोद ितवारी जी जानना चाहते हȅ  .(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सदÎय को बताना चाहता हूं िक मȅ 
कोई संकोच नहीं कर रहा हूं। महोदय, मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक मȅ इितहा स  का िवǏाथीर् हूं, मȅ 
जÇमू-कÌमीर क े इितहास को भी जानता हूं, इनके  इितहास को भी जानता हूं और वतर्मान सुरक्षा 
पिरवेश को भी जानता हूं। .(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, माननीय मंतर्ी जी बताना चाह रहे हȅ, आप सुन लीिजए। .(Ëय वधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: एक सेक ं ड बैिठए। माननीय सदÎयगण, यिद िकसी िवषय पर एक ĢÌन है, तो यह 
मंतर्ी जी और माननीय सदÎय तय नहीं करȂगे िक क्या बोला जाएगा, बिÊक उस िवषय पर ही बोला 
जाएगा और यह वह िवषय नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मंतर्ी जी, माननीय सदÎय जानना चाहते हȅ िक 
पयर्टकȗ की सुरक्षा क े िलए आपने क्या इंतज
ाम िकए हȅ। माननीय सदÎय, आप यही जानना चाहते 
हȅ? 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सभापित जी, वहाँ पर पूरा इंतजाम िकया गया है। महो
दय , अगर माननीय 
सदÎय जानना चाहते हȅ और उनमȂ सुनने का धैयर् है, तो मȅ भी बताना चाहूंगा, परंतु हमȂ थोड़ा-सा 
इितहास मȂ भी जाने की कोिशश करनी चािहए। .(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: महोदय, ट ूिरज्म बढ़
ा  या घटा? 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सभापित जी, ट ूिरज्म बढ़ा है।  
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
41

 
 
महोदय, मȅ बता रहा हूं िक 2023 मȂ 2 करोड़, 11 लाख पयर्टक गए हȅ और यह नंबर 
कर्मबǉ बढ़ रहा है। महोदय, कोिवड क े पूरे कालखंड मȂ क ु छ घटा था, लेिकन 2014 से  लेकर 
2023 और 2024, इन  लगातार दो वषș मȂ एक िरकॉडर् बना है, इन दस वषș मȂ िरक ॉडर् बना है। 
महोदय, 2004 से लेकर 2014 तक का जो इनका कालखंड था, ये उसको भी याद करȂ िक पयर्टक 
वहाँ पर जाने को कतराते थे और िबÊकु ल नहीं जाते थे। महोदय, जहाँ तक सुरक्षा का सवाल है, 
तो मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक िवगत क ु छ िदनȗ मȂ वहाँ पर 28 आतंकवादी मारे गए हȅ। ...(Ëय
वधान)... 
महोदय, यह िवषय दुख का है िक इन घटनाओं मȂ, हमारी उन मुठभेड़ȗ मȂ, हमारे क ु छ फौिजयȗ 
की भी मौत हुई है, जो दुखद है। ...(Ëयवधान)... जो आतंकवादी मारे गए हȅ, उनसे जो हमारे 
सैिनक मरे हȅ, उनकी संख्या बहुत कम है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ इन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूँ िक ज़रा... 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... महोदय, दो िमनट का समय िदया जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... इन्हȗने बहुत बड़ा िवषय 
उठाया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, मȅ इन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूँ िक 2004 से 2014 तक क ु ल 7,217 
आतंकवादी घटनाएं हुई थीं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 2014 से 21 जु लाई तक 2,259 घटनाएं हुई हȅ, जो 
नहीं होनी चािहए थीं, यह दुखद है, लेिकन इस पर वे राजनीित नहीं करȂ। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... मोदी 
सरकार की आतंकवाद पर ज़ीरो टॉलरȂस है। ...(Ëयवधान)... उसे समाÃत कर दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
उसे समाÃत कर दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, या तो वह जेल मȂ रहेगा, नहीं तो वह जहन्नुम मȂ 
रहेगा। ...(Ëय
वधान)... मȅ यह िबÊकु ल आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, ज़रा देख 
लीिजए, उस समय नागिरकȗ और िसक्योिरटी परसन्स की जो क ु ल मृत्यु हुई थी, दोनȗ िमलाकर 
इनके  जमाने मȂ, 2004 से 2014 तक 2,829 हुई थीं। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... इन दस वषș मȂ 2014 से 2021 
तक 941 हुई हȅ, िजसमȂ 67 Ģितशत की कमी आई है और जो इनके  दस वषर् थे और जो मोदी 
सरकार क े दस वषर् हȅ, उनमȂ आपरािधक घटनाओं मȂ 69 Ģितशत की कमी आई थी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
नागिरकȗ की मृत्यु मȂ 80 Ģितशत की कमी आई है। ...(Ëयवधान)... धारा 370 हटने क े बाद, लगभग 
900 आतंकवािदयȗ को अपनी सेना ने, जÇमू-कÌमीर पुिलस और पैरािमिलटर्ी फोसर् ने मारा है। 
...(Ëयवधान). .. जब ये सुरक्षा की बात करते हȅ, तो आतंकवाद की नींव तो 15 अगÎत, 1947 को 
देश क े बंटवारे क े साथ रख दी गई थी। ...(Ëयवधान)... िजस समय इन लोगȗ ने धारा 370 लागू की 
थी, आतंकवाद की बुिनयाद... ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 5.  ...(Interruptions)... You have made your 
point.   
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: आज वहाँ ËयवÎथा है, आज वहाँ उǏोग लग रहे हȅ, Îकू ल खुले हȅ, कॉलेज 
खुले हȅ, अÎपताल मȂ मरीजȗ का इलाज हो रहा है, बागवानी अच्छे से हो रही है, सड़कȂ बनाई जा 
रही हȅ और लोग वहाँ चैन क े वातावरण मȂ िंजदगी जी रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)..
 . शांित है, सुरक्षा की 
पूरी गारंटी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज आतंकवािदयȗ ने जो भी पहल शुरू  की है, वह जÊद समाÃत हो 
जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... जैसे बुझता हुआ दीपक फड़फड़ाता है, वैसे ही बुझने क े समय आतंकवादी 
आज अपनी गितिविधयȗ को जारी करके  देखना चा
हते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आज हम बताना चाहते 
हȅ िक उनके  मंसूबे पूरे नहीं हȗगे, लेिकन इनसे आगर्ह जरूर  है िक देश की सुरक्षा क े संबंध मȂ, 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सीमा की सुरक्षा क े संबंध मȂ और आतंकवाद को समाÃत करने क े संबंध मȂ ये राजनीित नहीं करȂ, 
वोट का लालच न करȂ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... Now, Shri Praful Patel.  
...(Interruptions)...  One minute.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat. I have 
to act as per rules. Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)...   I have no doubt that 
every Member of this House and the entire country is with  our Armed Forces. We are 
in one voice with them. Now, Shri Praful Patel. 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL: Sir, the question is related to tourism. Let us keep the 
temperature of the House like the beautiful weather of Kashmir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: That is what I said. I have already asked to keep the temperature of 
air conditioning a little lower so that we are cooler. Your suggestion should have come 
early in the morning. It is slightly late bu t don't generate more heat now. Am I right, 
Sir?  Please go ahead. 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL: Sir, the question is re lated to tourism, and, therefore, I will 
restrict myself to tourism.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am so happy.  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL: So, I will not increase the temperature of the House by asking 
anything else.  I will ask only my question and give some suggestion.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Suggestions will come du ring Budget speech and question will 
come now. 
 
SHRI PRAF
UL PATEL: My questi on is that after the two crore tourist numbers of last 
year, which is a very satisfying and a good number, we should all be very happy and 
proud that Kashmir is receiving more than two crore tourists in a year, which helps the 
economy of Jammu and Kashmir and it is good  for the people of Kashmir. After all, 
they are our citizens. They are patriotic as much as any other Indian.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And your supplementary? 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
43

 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL: Therefore, it is our du ty and the Government of India’s duty to 
see that tourism increases in Jammu and Kashmir.   
 सर, आिर्टकल 370 क े रǈ होने क े बाद, वहां पर जमीन खरीदना या और लोगȗ का वहां 
पर बसना अब संभव हो चुका है। आज जब हम कÌमीर मȂ 2 करोड़ से 4 करोड़ या िजतनी भी मातर्ा 
मȂ ट ूिरįम बढ़ाना चाहते हȅ, तो हमको वहां पर हर Ǜेणी क े होटलȗ की ज्यादा आवÌयकता होगी।  
...(Ëयवध
ान)... दूसरी ओर, हमको वहां पयर्टन बढ़ाने क े िलए वहां की जो सुंदर-सुंदर नैसिर्गक 
जगहȂ हȅ, वहां जाने क े िलए गडकरी जी क े माध्यम से और अच्छ ी सड़कȗ की जरूरत है।  इन दोनȗ 
जरूरतȗ क े संबंध मȂ भारत सरकार िनिÌचत रूप  से बहुत कदम उठा रही है, इसमȂ मुझे कोई भी 
शक नहीं है, लेिकन वहां पर होटÊस ज्यादा बनȂ, हर Ǜेणी क े होटÊस बनȂ और सहज ता से बने 
...(Ëयवधान)... अच्छी सड़के  बनȂ। मȅ यह जानना चाहता हूं िक इसके  िलए सरकार की ओर से क्या 
कदम उठाए जा रहे हȅ और उनकी क्या राय है? 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, पयर्टन को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए सरकार ने अनेक कदम उठाए हȅ, 
जैसे एक तो नीितगत पहल की गई है, होम Îटे, पेइंग गेÎट हाउस का Ģावधान िक
या गया है और 
हाउस बोट की भी ËयवÎथा की गई है। वहां सीमावतीर् गांव मȂ भी पयर्टन की सुिवधा उपलÅध कराई 
गई है। वहां गुलमगर् गȗडोला जैसे क ु छ Ģमुख िचिन्हत क्षेतर् हȅ। गुलमगर् गȗडोला मȂ वषर् 2022 मȂ 
8,54,496 पयर्टक पहुंचे। वहां की आम
दनी की बात भी कही गई। 2022 मȂ 91 करोड़  और अब 
2023 मȂ 10,13,458 पयर्टकȗ क े ǎ
ारा 108 करोड़ राजÎव की ĢािÃत की गई है। सर, वहां ढांचागत 
िवकास कायर् िकए गए हȅ। पटनीटॉप मȂ भी िवकास कायर् िकए गए हȅ। जÇमू मȂ रोपवे बनाया गया है। 
जÇमू और Ǜीनगर मȂ युवक और युवितयȗ क े िलए दो गॉÊफ कोसर् एवं जÇमू तवी मȂ दो गॉÊ फ कोसर् 
बनाए गए है, तािक वह Îथान पयर्टकȗ और िखलािड़यȗ को भी आकिर्षत कर सके । Ģधान मंतर्ी 
पैक े ज योजना क े तहत वहां ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He is replying correctly. Dr . John Brittas, the hon. M
inister is 
responding pointedly.  Listen to him.  …(Interruptions)… Please, go ahead. 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सर, उन्हȗने कहा िक वहां बढ़ावा देने क े िलए आप क्या कर रहे हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... वहां कई राजमागर् बन रहे हȅ। टनल भी लगभग कÇÃलीट है, िजससे वहां दूरी काफी 
कम होगी। वहां जÇमू और कÌमीर को पयर्टन क े िलए अनेकȗ सÇमान ĢाÃत हुए हȅ। गुलमगर् बेÎट 
एडवȂचर ट ूिरįम अव
ॉडर्, गुरेज को बेÎट ऑफबीट राÍटर्ीय पुरÎकार क े साथ वहां डल झील क े 
लाइट एंड साउंड शो को भी पुरÎकार िमला है। इससे वहां िवÌ वास बढ़ा है और वहां जी20 का भी 
कायर्कर्म हुआ था।   
 महोदय, जÇमू-कÌमीर की अथर्ËयवÎथा का Ģमुख आधार पयर्टक बन गया है और वह 
लोगȗ को रोजगार Ģदान करता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... जÇमू-कÌमीर क े क्षेतर् मȂ अब तक लगभग 5 
लाख लोगȗ को पयर्टन क े माध्यम से, पयर्टकȗ क े माध्यम से सुिवधा हुई है। वहां की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ 
पयर्टन का योगदान 2022-2023 मȂ 17,522 करोड़ का था और िपछले तीन वषș क े दौरान यह 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
वािर्षक औसत वृिǉ दर 15.13 Ģितशत है। इसिलए वहां की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ पयर्टकȗ और पयर्टन 
का िनिÌचत रूप  से बहुत बड़ा योगदान है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think you are satisfied. I think we can congratulate the hon. 
Minister for being so thorough with the reply. Now, Q. No.17. Shri Beedha Masthan 
Rao Yadav.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN: Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I don't appreciate this.  ...(Interruptions)...  I don't appreciate this.  
...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record.  ...( Interruptions)...  Hon. Member, 
don't force me. ...(Interruptions)... Please don't force me.  ...( Interruptions)..  This 
is not the way. You are in the Upper Hous e. Always remember this. The world is 
looking at us. Shri Beedha Masthan Rao Yadav. 
 
Compensation to Fishermen 
 
*17. SHRI BEEDHA MASTHAN RAO YADAV:  Will the Minister of FISHERIES, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the details of all ongoing fishery di sputes between Andhra Pradesh and Tamil 
Nadu; 
(b) 
whether Government has taken any st eps for resolving these disputes in a 
smooth and timely manner; 
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; 
(d) whether Government has provided any compensation to the fishermen who 
have suffered loss of livelihood as a result of these disputes; and 
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND DAIRYING (SHRI GEORGE KURIAN): (a ) to (e) A Statement is placed on the 
Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) It was informed by Govern ment of Andhra Pradesh during the 11
thmeeting 
of the Standing Committee of the Southern Zonal Council held in Chennai on 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
45

 
 
27thSeptember, 2019, that unauthorized entry an d illicit fishing is done by Tamil Nadu 
fishing boats in the territorial waters of Andhra Pradesh, which is causing fishing 
disputes between Andhra Pradesh and Tam il Nadu. Subsequently, the deliberations 
on this matter were held during the 12 th meeting of the Standing Committee of the 
Southern Zonal Council on 28th May, 2022 and the 30 th meeting of the Southern Zonal 
Council held on 3 rd September, 2022.The Inter-State Council Secretariat, Ministry of 
Home Affairs (ISCS, MHA)advised the Departme nt of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Governme nt of India (DoF, M/o FAH&D, GoI)to 
constitute a Regional Fisheries Management Council to address the inter-state fishing 
related issues. 
 The DoF, M/o FAH&D, Government of India vide its Order dated 29 th March, 
2023 has constituted three Regional Fi sheries Management Councils (RFMCs), 
namely Western, Eastern and Southern RFMC to address the inter-state fishing 
disputes. These RFMCs are Co-Chaired by the Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries), 
DoF, M/o FAH&D, GoI and the Secretary, in-charge of Department of Fisheries, 
concerned Coastal States/UTs on annual rotation basis. A representative from Indian 
Coast Guard is also one of the members of the each of the three RFMCs.  
 The Governments of Coastal States under  three RFMCs, were requested by DoF, 
M/o FAH&D, GoI, to inform about any inter- state fishing disputes before scheduling 
the first joint meeting of the three Region al Fisheries Management Council (RFMCs). 
Subsequently, the first joint meetin g of three RFMCs was held on 19
th August, 2023, 
wherein, the Government of Andhra Pradesh informed about the un-authorized entry 
and illicit fishing even during the fishing ban period by Tamil Nadu fishing boats in the 
territorial waters of the State of Andhra Pradesh and that clashes occurred between 
fishermen of Tamil Nadu and local fishermen. It was also informed that the matter was 
raised with the Government of Tamil Nadu at the Secretariat level for resolution. 
 Subsequent to the first Joint RFMC meet ing, Government of Andhra Pradesh in 
its letter dated 23
rd August, 2023 requested Government of Tamil Nadu to 
communicate the date and time to conduct a joint meeting to resolve the issue. The 
Government of Tamil Nadu has issued an Order dated 31st January, 2024 to constitute 
a district level committee with the District Collectors and other officers from 
Thiruvallur, Chennai, Chengalpattu of Ta mil Nadu and SPSR Nell ore, Prakasam and 
Tirupati districts of Andhra Pradesh to sens itize the fishermen and sort out the fishing 
disputes between the fishermen of both the States. 
 The DoF, M/o FAH&D, GoI ha s approved a project with total outlay of Rs. 364.0 
Crores under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) for the National 
Rollout of Vessel Communication and Support System including installation of 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
transponders on 1,00,000 fishing vessels in all coastal States an d Union Territories. 
The transponders are being fitted in th e fishing vessels with 100% government 
assistance. The transponders have geo-fe ncing features to give alerts to the 
fishermen upon approaching to or crossing over the authorized areas of fishing under 
the jurisdiction of the concerned coastal state/UT to prevent cross border or 
unauthorized fishing. 
 
(d) and (e) The DoF, M/o FAH&D, GoI, is taking several steps under the PMMSY 
towards providing financial assistance, wh ich includes livelihood and nutritional 
support for socio-economically backward fishers, and also Group Accident Insurance 
Scheme coverage. Under the PMMSY, fina ncial assistance is also provided for 
procurement of boats for better catch, ne ts, communication and tracking devices, 
safety kits to ensure safety of fishermen wh ile at sea. To improve the value realization 
to fishers, financial support is provid ed under PMMSY for development of post-
harvest and cold chain facilities, fish transp ort, fisheries infrastructure, fish market, 
value added enterprise units and such other activities. Besides, for conservation and 
sustainable development of fish resources  governmental support is provided under 
PMMSY for installation of artificial reefs, sea-ranching etc. 
 
SHRI BEEDHA MASTHAN RAO YADAV:  Sir, thank you for giving me this opportunity.  
The Central Water Commission recommended opening up of the sea mouth near 
Rayadoruvu village of Andhra Pradesh. Ca n the Minister elabor ate on whether these 
recommendations have been implemented? And if so, what are the details? Are there 
any specific legal or policy frameworks in place to address inter-State fishery 
disputes? If so, have these mechanisms b een utilised in the case of Andhra Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu?  And what have been the outcomes? Despite an easy solution of 
dredging the side of Pulicat Lake of An dhra Pradesh, why has the Government not 
worked on the solution?  Does the hon. Mi nister have any timeline for the completion 
of dredging works?  Sir, for your kind information, I accompanied the former Fisheries 
Minister, Shri Purushottam Rupala, along wi th the Joint Secretary three months ago 
just before the elections. He personally sp oke to the fishermen of both the States and 
he promised them that the dispute will be resolved immediately and justice will be 
done. The only problem is the necessary fu nding to dredging the Pulicat Lake. The 
Government of India recommended 50:50 sharing of funds. Since it is an inter-State 
project, let the Government of India take up  the project fully and do justice to the 
fishermen of both the States.  
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
47

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary. Shri Beedha Masthan Rao Yadav.   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, the answer.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Jairam, I will plead with you. Listen to the answer. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, the answer. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let me judge it. I am here to judge it. If there will be no answer, you 
have a mechanism. Avail it. Every time, don't intervene. It is not a good habit.   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, I have a right to...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please. If you have a right,  go according to the rules. You have no 
right the way you are doing it. Sitting in your chair and intervening every time is 
inappropriate. ...(Interruptions)...  No.  I don't.  ...( Interruptions)...  Nothing will go 
on record. ...(Interruptions)... Second supplementary. ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing 
will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... Soul-search and reflect.  Only then will you try 
to understand what I am saying.  Second supplementary. 
 
SHRI BEEDHA MASTHAN RAO YADAV: Sir, du ring the visit of the former Minister, 
Shri Purushottam Rupala, to these two States, he promised that he would talk to both 
the Chief Ministers of the respective States and find a solution. But so far, nothing 
happened. Sir, please let the Minister explain about it.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
मत्Îयपालन, पशुपालन और डेयरी मंतर्ी ( Ǜी राजीव रं जन िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह): सभापित 
महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने आंधर् Ģदेश और तिमलनाडु क े बीच सीमा का जो िववाद है, उसके  
बारे मȂ ĢÌन पूछा है। आंधर् Ģदेश क े मछु आरे कभी तिमलनाडु चले जाते हȅ, कभी तिमलनाडु क े 
मछु आरे आंधर् Ģदेश की बाउंडर्ी मȂ आ जाते हȅ, यह िववाद बहुत पहले से चल रहा है, 2019 से चल 
रहा है। पहले ज़ोनल लेवल पर एक किमटी थी - Southern Zonal Committee. उस  किमटी क े 
अंदर इन िववादȗ पर चचार् होती थी और उनका िनराकरण होता था, िजसमȂ सभी राज्य शािमल 
रहते थे। इसकी कई बैठकȂ हुईं; 27 िसतंबर, 2019 को हुई; िफर 28 मई, 2022 को हुई; िफर 3 
िसतंबर, 2022 को हुई। उसके  बाद गृह मंतर्ालय क े परामशर् पर एक Regional Fisheries 
Management Committee का िनमार्ण हुआ। 29 माचर्, 2023 को इसका िनमार्ण हुआ और उसके  
बाद Regional Fisheries Management Committee को तीन ज़ोन्स मȂ बाँटा गया। उन तीनȗ 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
ज़ोन्स क े िलए Western, Eastern और Southern, तीन RFMC किमिटयाँ बनाई गई हȅ। इसके  
साथ-साथ Îटेट लेवल पर भी, जैसा माननीय सदÎय ने पूछा िक राज्य क े Îतर पर भी - 
तिमलनाडु और आंधर् Ģदेश की सरकारȗ क े बीच भी इस िवषय पर चचार् हो रही है। आंधर् Ģदेश की 
सरकार ने तिमलनाडु की सरकार को िलखा और तिमलनाडु की सरकार क े िनदȃश और उन दोन
ȗ 
की सहमित से कई िजलȗ मȂ कलक्टसर् की अध्यक्षता मȂ दोनȗ राज्यȗ क े अिधकािरयȗ की सिमित 
बनी और उस सिमित मȂ इन सारे िवव ादȗ पर चचार् हो रही है, यह सत्य है। 
 उसके  अलावा लगभग 1 लाख िफिंशग वेसÊस ऐसे हȅ, िजनमȂ अब मंतर्ालय की तरफ से 
टर्ांसपȗडर मȂ िजयो िफिंशग की भी सुिवधा दी गई है। जैसे ही कोई मछु आरा अपने राज्य की 
बाउंडरी को कर्ॉस करता है, वह िसगनल देता है। लेिकन उसके  बावजूद भी िवव
ाद है और उस 
िववाद का िनराकरण Regional Fisheries Management Committee क े Îतर पर िकया जा रहा 
है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri P. Wilson; third supplementary.  
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, you would have seen that there is periodical firing and securing 
of the Tamil fishermen even when they underta ke fishing within the territorial waters of 
India. In fact, on July 11
th, about 22 Tamil fishermen were arrested; on 19 th June, four 
Tamil fishermen were arrested. The Sri Lank an Navy claims that 200 Indian fishermen 
were arrested and imprisoned, and about 27 trawlers were seized. One report says 
that 15 Tamil fishermen are still languishing in jail and 162 fishing boats are still under 
the control of Sri Lankan Navy. My question  is: What steps are you taking in respect 
of Sri Lanka? Are you taking any steps to get them released immediately or taking any 
steps to negotiate and give legal advice ? In fact, three fishermen were even 
sentenced to jail. They have to undergo tr ial and are still languishing in jail. Please 
explain that to this House. Our Chief Minister, Mr. M.K. Stalin , has written several 
letters, every now and then, bringing to your  notice periodical firing and securing of 
the Indian Tamil fishermen and keeping them in jail for long period. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the question relates to compensation to fishermen 
but the hon. Minister may address this issue if he likes.  
 
Ǜी राजीव रं जन िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जो सवाल उठाया 
है, ऐसा कई बार होता है। हमारे मछु आरे Ǜीलंका की सीमा मȂ चले जाते हȅ और Ǜीलंका क े 
मछु आरे हमारी सीमा मȂ चले आते हȅ, लेिकन इन िववादȗ पर एक joint working group है, िजसके  
माध्यम से Ǜी
लंका क े साथ बातचीत करके  इन समÎयाओं का समाधान समय-समय पर होता 
रहता है। वतर्मान मामले पर भी joint working committee इस पर िवचार करेगी।  िवदेश मंतर्ालय 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
49

 
 
क े अधीन ये सारी  joint working committees हȅ, groups हȅ, जो बन कर इन पर चचार् करती 
रहती हȅ। माननीय सदÎय जो सवाल उठा रहे हȅ, उसका joint working committee भी जरूर  
नोिटस लेगी। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary; Shrimati Sulata Deo.  
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO: Thank you so much, Sir.  
 सर, मȅ ओिडशा को belong करती हूँ। हमारे ओिडशा की 430 िकलोमीटर लÇबी coastal 
line है। अभी मछु आरȗ क े बारे मȂ जो बात की जा रह
 ी है, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
यह जानना चाहती हूँ िक जो ' Ģधानमंतर्ी मत्Îय संपदा योजना' मȂ टर्ांसपȗडर लगाने क े िलए, 1 
लाख  टर्ांसपȗडसर् की ËयवÎथा है, तो ओिडशा की coastal line मȂ िक तने मछु आरȗ क े vessels मȂ 
वह tracking device लगाने को िमला है और मछु आरȗ क े ऐसे िकतने traditional vessels हȅ, 
िजनके  upgradation क े िलए िकतना पैसा िमला है? सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इसका to the 
point answer माननीय मंतर्ी से जानना चाहती हूँ। थȅक यू। जय जगन्नाथ। 
 
Ǜी राजीव रं
जन िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎया ने बहुत 
अच्छा सवाल पूछा है। मत्Îय उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की सरकार ने िपछले 
10 वषș मȂ जो उपलिÅध हािसल की और माननीय सदÎ या िजस 'Ģधान मंतर्ी मत्Îय सÇपदा योजना' 
की बात कह रही हȅ, उसने उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ कर्ांित लाने का काम िकया है।  महोदय, अगर मȅ 
बताऊँ , तो 1950-51 से लेकर 2013 क े अंत तक इस देश का जो मत्Îय उत् पादन था, वह लगभग 
61.36 लाख टन था और 2014 से लेकर 2023 तक  हमारा मत्Îय उत्पादन 121.12 लाख टन हो 
गया है, जो लगभग दोगुने क े बराबर है। यह Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार क े 
ǎारा मत्Îय उत्पादन को क ृिष क े साथ जोड़ने वाली कर्ांितकारी कदम का ही पिरणाम है िक आज 
हम इतने बड़े पैमाने पर मत्Îय उत्पादन कर रहे हȅ।   
 सभापित महोदय, आज हम िवदेशȗ मȂ 63 हजार  करोड़ रुपए  क े मछली का सालाना 
एक्सपोटर् कर रहे हȅ। आज मत्Îय उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ िवÌ व मȂ हमारा दूसरा Îथान है। माननीय 
सदÎया ने ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ एक लाख वैसÊस पर transponder, signaling system की जो बात 
की है, उनको इसकी जानकारी उपलÅध कराई जाएगी िक ओिडशा मȂ ऐसे िकतने transponde r 
हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Saket Gokhale, fifth supplementary.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Thank you, Sir. This question pertains very specifically to 
the subject of compensation for traditional farmers.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. 
 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी साके त गोखले: सर, उन्हȗने ट ूिरįम पर कÌमीरी पंिडत बोला, लेिकन आप हमेशा मुझे रोकते 
हȅ। ठीक है, सर, कोई बात नहीं। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Saket, pl ease confine to your suppl ementary, you would get a 
good answer. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: You would not even let me finish, Sir. सर, आप मुझे िबना 
टॉिपक बोल देते हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no.  You talked of 'Kashmiri Pandits'.  Please. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Anyway, my question  is this. I will in troduce it in two 
sentences. In 2019, the United States ba nned imports of wild-caught shrimp from 
India. This ban has been in place for the last five years now. Due to this, the 
fishermen across the coastal areas, especia lly, of So
 uthern and Eastern India, are 
forced to sell their wild-caught shrimp to other countries at much lower prices. So, 
my question is: "What steps is the Ministry taking to compensate fishermen who have 
been affected by the five year long shrimp ban that has been imposed by the United 
States?" Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is a very unique concept of compensation. Hon. Minister may 
respond.          
 
Ǜी राजीव रं जन िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह: सर, माननीय सदÎय ने िǛÇप क े बारे मȂ जानना चाहा है।  
मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक आज हम जो िफश का एक्सपोटर् कर रहे हȅ, उसमȂ मैिक्समम िहÎसेदारी 
िǛÇप का है और िǛÇप की िहÎसेदारी ही हमारे एक्सपोटर् को बढ़ा रही है, लेिकन हम वैÊयू 
एिडशन िǛÇप को िवदेशȗ मȂ एक्सपोटर् करȂ, इसके  िलए हम लोग कारर्वा
ई कर रहे हȅ।   
िफशरमेन क े वेलफे यर की जो बात उन्हȗने कही है, उस संबंध मȂ मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूँ 
िक 'Ģधान मंतर्ी मत्Îय सÇपदा योजना' मȂ आज जो िफशरमेन हȅ या िजसको हम लोग िफ
श फामर्सर् 
कहते हȅ, उन िफशरमेन या िफश फामर्सर् क े िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने ' िकस ान कर् ेिडट काडर्' की 
योजना शुरू  की है और इसके  िलए िकसानȗ क े लगभग 4,26,134 एिÃलके शन्स Îवीकृ त हुए तथा 
इसके  िलए 2477.95 करोड़ रुपए  िरलीज िकये जा चुक े हȅ। आकिÎमक पिरिÎथित मȂ जो दुघर्टनाएँ 
होती थीं, उनके  िलए आ दरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने िफशरमेन को बीमा कवर से भी जोड़ने का काम 
िकया है। आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े ǎारा ये जो सारे काम िकए गए हȅ, उन्हीं का 
यह पिरणाम है िक आज हमारा मछल ी उत्पादन बढ़ रहा है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No. 18, Dr. Sikander Kumar, first supplementary.    
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
51

 
 
Yuva Sahakar Scheme in Himachal Pradesh 
 
*18.  DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: Will the Mini ster of COOPERATION be pleased to 
state: 
(a) whether National Cooperative Deve lopment Corporation (NCDC) is giving 
opportunities to Indian cooperative entrepreneurs under Yuva Sahakar Scheme 
for attracting cooperative business ventures in Himachal Pradesh; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) the details of funds sanctioned and disbursed to Himachal Pradesh in the 
current year; 
(d) the number of beneficiaries who benefitted from this scheme till date; and 
(e) the steps taken by Government for development of cooperatives in the 
country? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COOPERATION (SHRI MURLIDHAR 
MOHOL): (a) to (e) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Yes, “Yuva Sahakar – Cooperative Ente rprise Support and Innovation 
Scheme” is being implemented by National Cooperative Development Corporation 
(NCDC) across the country including the state of Himachal Pradesh, with the aim to 
encourage newly formed cooperative societie s with new and/or innovative ideas. The 
scheme encourages young entrepreneur Cooperative Societies which are in operation 
for a minimum of 3 months. The loan provided  under the scheme is a long term loan 
(up to 5 years) and as an incentive, NCDC provides 2% interest subvention on its 
applicable rate of interest on term loan for the project activities. Further, the loan 
component under the scheme can also be do vetailed with subsidy, as applicable and 
available from other Government of India schemes. 
 
(c) NCDC funding is project based. Till date, no proposal has been received from any 
cooperative in Himachal Pradesh under Yuva Sahakar Scheme. 
 
(d) As on 30/06/2024, NCDC has sanction ed financial assistance of Rs.4,556.55 
lakh to cooperatives across the country, under Yuva Sahakar scheme, with more than 
14,000 beneficiary members and released assistance of Rs.248.35 lakh. 
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(e) Ministry of Cooperation with active part icipation of various States/ UTs has taken 
various initiatives to revitalize and stre ngthen the cooperative sector across the 
country, the details of whichare enclosed at Annexure. 
 
Annexure 
 
Brief of 54 initiatives taken by Ministry of Cooperation 
 
Ministry of Cooperation, since its inception on 6 th July, 2021, has und ertaken several 
initiatives to realize the vision of “Sahakar-se-Samriddhi” and to strengthen & 
deepen the cooperative movement from Prim ary to Apex level Cooperatives in the 
country. List of initiatives taken and progress made so far are as follows: 
 
A. Making Primary Cooperatives economically vibrant and transparent 
 
1. Model Bye-Laws for PACS making them multipurpose, multidimensional and 
transparent entities : Government, in consultation with all the stakeholders, 
including States/ UTs, National Level Federations, State Cooperative Banks 
(StCBs), District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs), etc., has prepared and 
circulated Model Byelaws for PACS to a ll the States/ UTs, which enable PACS 
to undertake more than 25 business  activities, improve governance, 
transparency and accountability in their op erations. Provisions have also been 
made to make the membership of PA CS more inclusive and broad-based, 
giving adequate representation to women and Scheduled Castes/Schedules 
Tribes. So far, 32 States/ UTs have ad opted Model Byelaws or their existing 
byelaws are in line with Model Byelaws. 
2. Strengthening of PACS through Computerization :  In order to strengthen PACS, 
project for Computerization of functional  PACS with a total financial outlay of 
₹2,516 Crore has been approved by the Government of India, which entails 
bringing all functional PACS in the Co untry onto a common ERP based national 
software, linking them with NABARD through StCBs and DCCBs. A total of 
67,009 PACS from 30 States/ UTs have been sanctioned under the project. The 
hardware has been procured by 28 Stat es/UTs. Total 25,674 PACS have been 
onboarded on ERP Software and 15,207 PACS have gone live. 
3. Establishing New Multipurpose PACS/D airy/Fishery Cooperatives in uncovered 
Panchayats: The plan for establishing ne w multipurpose PACS or primary 
dairy/fisheries cooperatives covering all the Panchayats/villages in the next five 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
53

 
 
years, with support of NABARD, NDDB , NFDB, NCDC and other National level 
Federations has been approved by the Government. As per National 
Cooperative Database, a total of 6,844 new PACS, Dairy and Fishery 
cooperative societies have been registered across States/UTs. 
4. World’s Largest Decentralized Grain Storage Plan in Cooperative sector : 
Government has approved a plan to create warehouses, custom hiring centers, 
primary processing units and other agri infrastructure for grain storage at PACS 
level, through convergence of various GOI schemes, including AIF, AMI, SMAM, 
PMFME, etc. This will reduce wastage of food grains and transportation costs, 
enable farmers to realize better prices  for their produce and meet various 
agricultural needs at the PACS level it self. Under the Pilot Project, godowns 
have been constructed in 11 PACS of 11 States and the Pilot is now being 
extended to 500 additional PACS. 
5. PACS as Common Service Centers (CSC s) for better access to e-services : An 
MoU has been signed between Ministry of Cooperation, MeitY, NABARD and 
CSC e-Governance Services India Limi ted for providing more than 300 e-
services such as banking, insurance,  Aadhar enrolment/updation, health 
services, PAN card and IRCTC/ Bus/ Air ticket, etc. through PACS. So far, 
37,169 PACS have started providing CSC se rvices to rural citizens which will 
also result in increase in income of these PACS. 
6. Formation of new Farmer Producer  Organizations (FPOs) by PACS : 
Government has allowed 1,100 additional FPOs to be formed  by PACS with the 
support of NCDC, in those blocks where FPOs have not yet been formed or the 
blocks are not covered by any other impl ementing agency. Apart from this, 992 
FPOs have been formed in the cooperative sector by NCDC. Th is will be helpful 
in providing farmers with necessary market linkages and get fair and 
remunerative prices for their produce. 
7. PACS given priority for Re tail Petrol/Diesel outlets : Government has allowed 
PACS to be included in the Combined Category 2 (CC2) for allotment of retail 
petrol/ diesel outlets. As per information received from Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs), more than 270 PACS from 25 Stat es/UTs have applied online for retail 
petrol/ diesel outlets. 
8. PACS given permission to convert bulk c onsumer petrol pumps into retail 
outlets: Based on the discussions with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, guidelines have been issued to convert the existing bulk consumer licensee 
PACS into retail outlets for increasin g the profit of PACS and generate 
employment opportunities in rural ar eas. 109 PACS from 4 States having 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
wholesale consumer pumps have given consent for conversion into Retail 
Outlets, out of which 43 PACS have r eceived Letter of Intent (LOI) from the 
OMCs. 
9. PACS eligible for LPG Distributorship for diversifying its activities : Government 
has now allowed PACS to apply for LPG Di stributorships. This will give PACS an 
option to increase their economic activities and create new employment 
opportunities in rural areas. From four States/Union Territories, a total of 31 
PACS have submitted online applications. 
10. PACS as PM Bharatiya Jan Aushadhi Kend ra for improving access to generic 
medicines at rural level : Government is promoting PACS to operate Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras which will provide additional income 
source to them and ease the access to ge neric medicines for rural citizens. So 
far, 4,341 PACS/ cooperative societies have applied online for PM Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Kendras, out of which 2,594 PACS have been given initial approval 
by PMBI and 674 have received drug licen ces from State Drug Controllers which 
are ready to function as PM Bhartiya Jan Aushadhi Kendras. 
11. PACS as Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samriddhi Kendras (PMKSK): Government is 
promoting PACS to operate PMKSK for en suring easy accessibility of fertilizer 
& related services to farmers in the country. As per the information shared by 
States/ UTs, 38,141 PACS are functioning as PMKSK. 
12. Convergence of PM-KUSUM at PACS level : Farmers associated with PACS can 
adopt solar agricultural water pumps and install photovoltaic modules in their 
farms. 
13. PACS to carry out O&M of rural piped water supply schemes (PWS): In order to 
utilize the deep reach of PACS in rural areas, on the init iative of the Ministry of 
Cooperation, Ministry of Jal Shakti has ma de PACS as eligible agencies to carry 
out the Operations & Maintenance (O &M) of PWS in rural areas. As per 
information received from States/ UT s, 1,833 PACS have been identified/ 
selected by 16 States/ UTs to provide O&M services at Panchayat/ Village 
level. 
14. Micro-ATMs to Bank Mitra Cooperative Societies for providing doorstep financial 
services: Dairy and Fisheries cooperative soci eties can be made Bank Mitras of 
DCCBs and StCBs. To ensure their ease of doing business, transparency and 
financial inclusion, Micro-ATMs are also  being given to these Bank Mitra Co-
operative Societies with support from NABARD to provide 'Door-step Financial 
Services'. As a pilot project, about 2,70 0 Micro-ATMs have b een distributed to 
Bank Mitra cooperative societies in Panchmahal and Banaskantha Districts of 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
55

 
 
Gujarat. This initiative is now being implemented in all the Districts of the State of 
Gujarat. 
15. Rupay Kisan Credit Card to Members of Milk Cooperatives : In order to expand 
the reach of DCCBs/ StCBs and to prov ide necessary liquidity to the members 
of Dairy Cooperative societies, Rupa y Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) are being 
distributed to the members of cooperatives  for providing credit at comparatively 
lower interest rates and to enable them to carry out other financial transactions. 
So far, 48,000 Rupay KCC have be en distributed in Panchmahal and 
Banaskantha Districts of Gujarat. This in itiative is now being implemented in all 
the Districts of the State of Gujarat. 
16. Formation of Fish Farmer Producer Organization (FFPO) : In order to provide 
market linkage and processing facilitie s to fishermen, NCDC has registered  69 
FFPOs in the initial phase. In addition, Department of Fisheries, Government of 
India has allocated the work of converti ng 1000 existing fisheries cooperative 
societies into FFPOs to NCDC, with an approved outlay of Rs. 225.50 crore. 
 
B. Strengthening the Urban and Rural Cooperative Banks
 
 
17. UCBs have been allowed to open new branches to expand their business: UCBs 
can now open new branches up to 10% (maximum 5 branches) of the existing 
number of branches in the previous financial year without prior approval of RBI. 
18. UCBs have been allowed by RBI to offer doorstep services to their customers:  
Door step banking facility can now be provided by UCBs. Account holders of 
these banks can now avail various banking facilities at home such as cash 
withdrawal, cash deposit, KYC, demand dr aft and life certificate for pensioners, 
etc. 
19. Cooperative banks have been allowed to  make one-time settlement of 
outstanding loans, like Commercial Banks: Co-operative banks, through board-
approved policies, can now provide the process for settlement with borrowers, 
along with technical write-off. 
20. Time limit increased to achieve Priori ty Sector Lending (PSL) targets given to 
UCBs: RBI has extended the timeline for UCBs to achieve Priority Sector 
Lending (PSL) targets by two years i.e., up to March 31, 2026. 
21. A Nodal Officer designated in RBI for regular interaction with UCBs : In order to 
meet the long pending demand of the coop erative sector for closer coordination 
and focused interaction, RBI has notified a nodal officer. 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
22. Individual housing loan limit  more than doubled by  RBI for Rural and Urban 
Cooperative Banks: 
a. Housing loan limit of Urban Cooperativ e Banks has now been doubled from Rs. 
30 lakhs to Rs. 60 lakhs. 
b. Housing loan limit of Rural Cooperative Banks has been increased to two and a 
half times to Rs. 75 lakhs. 
23. Rural Cooperative Banks will now be able to lend to commercial real estate/ 
residential housing sector, thereby diversifying their business : This will not only 
help Rural Cooperative Banks to diversify their business, but will benefit Housing 
cooperative societies also. 
24. License fee reduced for Cooperative Banks : License fee for onboarding 
Cooperative Banks to ‘Aadhaar Enable d Payment System’ (AePS) has been 
reduced by linking it to the number of transactions. Cooperative financial 
institutions will also be able to get th e facility free of cost for the first three 
months of the pre-production phase. Wit h this, farmers will now be able to get 
the facility of banking at their home with through biometrics. 
25. Non-scheduled UCBs, StCBs and DCCB s notified as Member Lending 
Institutions (MLIs) in CGTMSE Scheme to increase the share of cooperatives in 
lending: Cooperative banks will now be able to take advantage of risk coverage 
up to 85 percent on the loans given. Al so, cooperative sector enterprises will 
also be able to get collateral free loans from cooperative banks now. 
26. Notification of Scheduling norms for including Urban Cooperative Banks: UCBs 
that meet the 'Financially Sound and We ll Managed' (FSWM) criteria and have 
maintained the minimum deposits required for classification as Tier 3 for the last 
two years are now eligible to be included in Schedule II of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 and get 'Scheduled' status. 
27. Monetary ceiling doubled by RBI for Gold Loan:  RBI has doubled monetary 
ceiling from Rs. 2 lakhs to Rs.4 lakh, for those UCBs that meet the PSL targets.  
28. Umbrella Organization fo r Urban Cooperative Banks : RBI has accorded 
approval to the National Federation of  Urban Co-operative Banks and Credit 
Societies Ltd. (NAFCUB) for the formation of an Umbrella Organization (UO) 
for the UCB sector, which will provid e necessary IT infrastructure and 
operational support to around 1,500 UCBs.  
 
C. Relief to Cooperative Societies in the Income Tax Act
 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
57

 
 
29. Surcharge reduced from 12 % to 7% fo r co-operative societies having income 
between Rs. 1 to 10 Cr.: This will reduce the burden of Income Tax on 
Cooperative Societies and mo re capital will be availabl e with them to work for 
the benefit of their members. 
30. MAT reduced for cooperativ es from 18.5% to 15%: With this provision, now 
there is parity between Cooperative Societies and Companies in this regard. 
31. Relief in cash transactions under section 269ST of the Income Tax Act: In order 
to remove difficulties in cash transactio ns by cooperatives under Section 269ST 
of IT Act, Government has issued a clar ification that cash transaction of less 
than Rs. 2 lakhs done by a cooperative society with its distributor in a day will be 
considered separately, and will not be charged with income tax penalty. 
32. Tax cut for new manufacturing Cooperative societies: Government has decided 
that a flat lower tax rate of 15% will be charged, comp ared to an earlier rate of 
up to 30% plus surcharge, for new cooperatives commencing manufacturing 
activities by March 31, 2024. This will encourage the formation of new 
cooperative societies in the manufacturing sector. 
33. Increase in limit of Cash  Deposits and Cash Loans  by PACS and PCARDBs: 
Government has enhanced the limit for Cash Deposits and Cash Loans by PACS 
and Primary Cooperative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks (PCARDBs) 
from Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 2 lakh per memb er. This provision will facilitate their 
activities, increase their business and benefit members of their societies. 
34. Increase in the limit of Tax Deducted at Source (TDS ) in Cash Withdrawal:  
Government has increased the cash with drawal limit of cooperative societies 
without deduction of tax at source from Rs.1 crore to Rs.3 crore per year. This 
provision will save Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) for cooperative societies, 
which will enhance their liquidity. 
 
D. Revival of Cooperative Sugar Mills 
 
35. Relief from Income Tax to Sugar Cooperative Mills : Government has issued a 
clarification that cooperative sugar mills  would not be subjected to additional 
income tax for paying higher sugarcan e prices to farmers up to Fair and 
Remunerative or State Advised Price, from April, 2016 onwards. 
36. Resolution of decades old pending issu es related to Income Tax of Sugar 
Cooperative Mills : Government has made a provision in its Union Budget 2023-
24, wherein Sugar cooperatives have been allowed to claim as expenditure their 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
payments to sugarcane farmers for the period prior to assessment year 2016–
17, giving them a relief of more than Rs.10,000 crore. 
37. Rs. 10,000 crore loan schemes launched for strengthening of Sugar Cooperative 
Mills: Government has launched a scheme through NCDC for setting up ethanol 
plants or cogeneration plants or for wo rking capital or for all three purposes. 
Loan amount of Rs. 5746.76 cr. ha s been sanctioned by NCDC to 36 
Cooperative Sugar Mills so far. 
38. Preference to Cooperative Sugar Mills in purchase of ethanol : Cooperative 
Sugar Mills have now been put at pa r with private companies for ethanol 
procurement by Government of India under the Ethanol Blending Programme 
(EBP).  
39. Reduction in GST on molasses from 28% to 5%: Government has decided to 
reduce the GST on molasses from 28% to  5% which will enable cooperative 
sugar mills to earn more profits for their members by selling molasses to 
distilleries with higher margins. 
 
E. Three new National Level Multi-State Societies 
 
 
40. New National Multi-State Cooperat ive Seed Society for certified seeds : 
Government has established a new apex multi-state cooperative seed society 
under the MSCS Act, 2002, namely Bhar atiya Beej Sahakari Samiti Limited 
(BBSSL) as an umbrella organization fo r quality seed cultivation, production 
and distribution under a single brand. BBSSL so far has planted breeder seeds 
of Wheat, Mustard, and Pulses (Gram, Pea) on 366 Hectare land during Rabi 
season. Similarly, during Kharif seas on breeder seeds of Peddy, Moong, 
Soyabean, Groundnut, Jowar and Guar have been planted on 148.26 Hectare 
land. As on date 11714 PACS/ Cooperative Societies have become member of 
BBSSL. 
41. New National Multi-State Cooperative Organic Society for organic farming : 
Government has established a new apex multi-state cooperative organic society 
under the MSCS Act, 2002, namely National Cooperative Organics Limited 
(NCOL) as an umbrella organization to produce, distribute and market certified 
and authentic organic products. As on date 3,775 PACS/ cooperative societies 
have become member of NCOL. So fa r, 12 organic products have been 
launched by NCOL under “Bharat Organics” brand. 
42. New National Multi-State Cooperative Export Society for promoting exports : 
Government has established a new apex multi-state cooperative export society 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
59

 
 
under the MSCS Act, 2002, namely Na tional Cooperative Export Limited 
(NCEL) as an umbrella organization to give thrust to exports from cooperative 
sector. As on date, about 7700  PACS/ cooperative societies have become 
member of NCEL. A total of 8,15,007 metric tonne s of commodities have been 
exported by NCEL. Out of which 8,01, 790 metric tonnes of rice, 7,685 metric 
tonnes of onions, 4507 metric tonnes of s u g a r ,  1 0 2 5  m e t r i c  t o n n e s  o f  w h e a t  
have been exported. 
 
F. Capacity Building in Cooperatives
 
 
43. Promotion of training and aw areness through National Council for Cooperative 
Training (NCCT) : By increasing its reach, NCCT has conducted 3,619 training 
programs and provided training to 2,21,4 78 participants in FY 2023-24. From 
April to June 2024, NCCT has conducte d 494 programmes against the quarterly 
target of 435 programmes and trained 19, 591 participants against the target of 
10875 participants. 
44. Establishment of the Cooperative University : Cabinet Note has been prepared 
by Ministry of Cooperation for setting up of a National Cooperative University for 
Cooperative education, training, consul tancy, research and development and a 
sustainable and quality supply of trained manpower. 
 
G. Use of Information Technology for ‘Ease of Doing Business’ 
 
45. Computerization of the Central Registrar’s Office: Central Registrar’s office has 
been computerized to create a digita l ecosystem for Multi-State Cooperative 
Societies, which will assist in processing  applications and service requests in a 
time bound manner. 
46. Scheme for computerization of office of  RCSs in States and Union Territories : 
To increase ‘Ease of doing businesses for Cooperative Societies and create a 
digital ecosystem for transparent paperle ss regulation in all the States/ Union 
Territories, a Centrally Sponsored Project for computerization of RCS Offices 
has been approved by the Government. Gr ants will be provided for purchase of 
hardware, development of software, etc. to the States/ UTs.  
47. Computerization of Agriculture and Rural Development Banks (ARDBs) : To 
strengthen the long-term cooperative credit structure, the project of 
computerization of 1,851 units of Ag riculture and Rural Development Banks 
(ARDBs) spread across 13 States/ Union Territories has been approved by the 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Government. NABARD is the implementi ng agency for the project and will 
develop a national level software for AR DBs. Hardware, support for digitization 
of legacy data, training to the employees, etc. will be provided under the 
project. So far, proposals from 10 States/UTs have been received and 
sanctioned. Further, GOI share amounting to Rs 4.26 crore was released to 8 
States/UTs in FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 for procurement of hardware, 
digitization and setting up of support system. 
 
H.  Other Initiatives 
 
48. New National Cooperative Database for authentic and updated data repository: 
A database of cooperatives in the country has been prepared with the support of 
State Governments to facilitate stakeholders in policy making and 
implementation of programmes/ scheme s related to cooperatives across the 
country. So far, data of around 8.09 lakh  cooperatives has been captured in the 
database. 
49. Formulation of New National Cooperative Policy : A National level committee 
comprising 49 experts and stakeholders drawn from all over the Country has 
been constituted to formulate the New Na tional Cooperative Policy for enabling 
a vibrant ecosystem to realize the vision of ‘Sahakar-se-Samriddhi’. 
50. Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2023 : Amendment has 
been brought in the MSCS Act, 2002 to strengthen governance, enhance 
transparency, increase acco untability, reform electoral process and incorporate 
provisions of 97
th Constitutional Amendment in  the Multi State Cooperative 
Societies. 
51. Inclusion of Cooperatives as ‘buyers’ on GeM portal:  Government has 
permitted cooperatives to register as ‘b uyer’ on GeM, enabling them to procure 
goods and services from over 67 lakh vendors to facilitate economical purchases 
and greater transparency. So far, 559 cooperative societies have been 
onboarded on GeM as buyers. 
52. Expansion of National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC) to 
increase its range and depth : NCDC has launched new schemes in various 
sectors such as ‘Swayamshakti Sahkar’ for SHGs; ‘Deerghavadhi Krishak 
Sahkar’ for long term agricultural credit and ‘Dairy Sahkar’ for dairy. Total 
financial assistance of Rs. 60,618.47 Cror es has been disbursed by NCDC in FY 
2023-24. NCDC has disbursed Rs.19,287.17 crore so far in the financial year 
2024-25. Government of India has pe rmitted NCDC to issue bonds worth ₹2000 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
61

 
 
crore with government guarantee, subject  to the adherence of specified terms 
and conditions. Further, NCDC is setting  up sub-offices in 6 North Eastern 
States – Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalay a, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and 
Tripura with the objective of taking vari ous national schemes to the cooperative 
societies at their doorstep. 
53. Financial assistance by NCDC for Deep Sea Trawlers : NCDC is providing 
financial assistance for projects related to deep sea trawlers in coordination with 
the Department of Fisheries, Government of India. Various financial assistances 
have been sanctioned by NCDC such as ; Rs. 11.55 crores for purchase of 14 
deep sea trawlers in Maharashtra at a bl ock cost of Rs 20.30 crores, Rs 37.39 
crores to Rajmata Vikas Macchimar Sa hakari Sanstha Limited, Mumbai for 
setting up a seafood processing unit at a Block Cost of Rs.46.74 crores, Rs. 
32.69 crores for Integrated Fisheries Development Project (IFDP) of 
Government of Kerala and NCDC has sanc tioned the proposal of Shri Mahavir 
Macchimar Sahakari Mandali Limited, Gujarat for purchasing 30 deep sea 
trawlers with a block cost of Rs.36.00 crores. 
54. Refund to Investors of Sahara Group of Societies : A portal has been launched 
for making payments to the genuine depo sitors of the cooperative societies of 
Sahara Group in a transparent manner. Disbursements have already started 
after proper identification and submission of proof of their deposits and claims. 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सहकािरता मंतर्ी 
जी से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक िहमाचल Ģदेश की सहकारी संÎथाओं और सिमितयȗ क े उत्थान 
और सशिƪकरण क े िलए मंतर्ालय ने क्या कदम उठाए हȅ? दूसरा, िहमाचल Ģदेश की और देश 
की सहकारी Ģाइमरी एगर्ीकÊचर कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटीज़ (पीएसीएस) क े उत्थान क े िलए 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ने क्या कदम उठाए हȅ, धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: माननीय सभापित महोदय, सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ने िहमाचल Ģदेश क े 
सहकारी संÎथाओं और सिमितयȗ क े उत्थान और सशिƪकरण क े िलए बहुत सारे कदम उठाए हȅ। 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ǎारा राÍटर्ीय सहकार िवकास िनगम क े माध्यम से िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ िविभन्न 
सहकारी सिमितयȗ क े िवकास क े िलए माकȃिंटग और इनपुट्स क े िलए 218 करोड़ 46 लाख रुपय े, 
इंडिÎटर्यल एंड सिर्वस को -ऑपरेिटव को 300 करोड़ 38 लाख  रुपय े, आईसीडीपी क े तहत 308 
करोड, 32 लाख रुपए  सिहत आज तक क ु ल लगभग 973 करोड, 50 लाख रुपए  से भी अिधक की 
िवǄीय सहायता Ģदान की गई है। सहकािरता मंतर्ालय की क Ȃदर्ीय Ģायोिजत पिरयोजना, पैक्स क े 
तहत क ंÃयूटराइजेशन क े िलए िहमाचल Ģदेश से 870 पैक्स क े ĢÎताव Îवीकृ त िकए गए हȅ। 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
हाडर्वेयर की खरीद और डेटा क े िडिजटाइजेशन और सपोटर् िसÎटम Îथािपत करने क े िलए 
भारत सरकार क े िहÎसे क े 16 करोड, 88 लाख रुपय े भी अभी तक िहमाचल Ģदेश को जारी िकए 
गए हȅ। सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ने िहमाचल Ģदेश क े क ृिष और गर्ामीण िवकास बȅकȗ क े ऑपरेशंस मȂ 
सुधार लाने हेतु एआरडीबी क े क ंÃयूटराइजेशन की पिरयोजना क े िलए भी अभी आिर्थक मदद की 
है।  
 माननीय सदÎय का दूसरा सवाल यह था िक पैक्स क े िलए सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ने क्या-
क्या कदम उठाए हȅ? मȅ यहाँ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ने देश मȂ "सहकार 
से समृिǉ" की पिरकÊपना को साकार करने क े िलए 54 नए इनीिशएिटËस िलए हȅ। इनमȂ पैक्स को 
सशƪ करने क े िलए जो काम करना चािहए, उस पर जोर िदया गया है। पैक्स क ंÃयूटराइजेशन, 
िजससे सभी कायर्शील पैक्स को ईआरपी आधािरत सीएनएस पर लाकर राज्य सहकारी बȅक तथा 
िजला सहकारी बȅक क े माध्यम से नाबाडर् से िंलक करना शुरू  िकया गया है। पैक्स क े िलए मॉडल 
बाई लॉज़ तैयार िकए गए हȅ, िजससे वे अभी 25 से भी अिधक इकोनॉिमक एिक्टिवटीज़ कर सकते 
हȅ और अपने Ëयवसाय मȂ िविवधता लाकर आिर्थक Ģगित कर पाएँगे।   
पैक्स को सीएससी क े रूप  मȂ कायर् करने क े िलए सक्षम िकया गया है, िजससे गर्ामीण 
जनता बȅिंकग, बीमा, आधार नामांकन, ÎवाÎथ्य आिद 300 से भी अिधक कानूनी सेवाएं ĢाÃत कर 
सकती हȅ। पैक्स अब Ģधान मंतर्ी िकसान समृिǉ क Ȃ दर् क े ǎारा फिर्टलाईजसर् और कीटनाशक 
िवतिरत कर सकȂ गे और Ģधान मंतर्ी भारतीय जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् क े रूप  मȂ जेनेिरक औषिध की 
उपलÅधता भी सुिनिÌचत करȂगे। पैक्स गर्ामीण नल जल आपूिर्त योजना क े तहत पानी सिमित क े 
रूप  मȂ भी कायर् कर सकते हȅ। ऐसे अनेक कायर् सहकािरता मंतर्ालय क े ǎारा देश क े गर्ामीण 
अथर्ËयवÎथा को मजबूत करने हेतु िकए जा रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second Supplementary; Dr. Sikander Kumar. 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार: सर, मेरा ĢÌन हो गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third Supplementary; Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil. 
 
Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल: सर, िहमाचल मȂ सबसे ज्यादा सेब की माकȃ ट है।  मंतर्ी जी 
हमारे महाराÍटर् Îटेट से आते हȅ। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से उनसे पूछना चाहती हूँ िक यह सेब की माकȃ ट 
एक ही इंडिÎटर्यिलÎट क े हाथ मȂ है - अडाणी। क्या मंतर्ी जी उस  माकȃ ट को सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ 
लाने क े िलए क ु छ Ģयास करȂगे? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। यह एक रोचक ĢÌन है। 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: मȅ रजनी ताई से ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल: सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
63

 
 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, आगे नहीं। I am on the murmur.  ...(Interruptions)... माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: माननीया रजनी ताई हमारे महाराÍटर् से आती हȅ। मȅ उनसे बाद मȂ बात करके  
सभी िडटेÊस उनको दे दूँगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth Supplementary; Dr. V. Sivadasan.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Respected Mr. Chairman, Sir, in our nation, co-operative sector 
has given great contribution to the development of rural and urban areas. In the Yuva 
Sahakar Scheme, NCDC has sanctioned only Rs. 45 crores across the country. They 
told us about the scheme that there ar e 14,000 beneficiary members and released 
only Rs.2 crore 48 lakhs. This is a very pa thetic situation. So my question is: Do you 
have any plan to give financial assistance to the State Government for supporting the 
cooperative sector in our nation? 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: महोदय, सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ǎारा 54 नई पहलȂ, िजन पर हम काम कर 
रहे हȅ, मुझे लगता है िक सहकािरता क े माध्यम से हर एक क्षेतर् मȂ अलग-अलग 54 पहल Ȃ जो हȅ, 
उनमȂ बȅक, PACS, डेयरी, िफिशयरीज़ आिद सभी क्षेतर्ȗ को सक्षम करने क े िलए एक योजना  
बनाई गई है। यहां मेरे पास िडटेल है, मुझे लगता है िक इस पर िवÎतृत बात कर
नी पड़ेगी। मȅ इसे 
पटल पर रखता हूं और आपको भी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI MURLIDHAR MOHOL: Ok
ay. One minute. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the hon. Minister is responding. 
  
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: आपने यहां युवा सहकार योजना क े बारे मȂ जानकारी मांगी है, इस योजना 
क े अंतगर्त कोई भी सहकारी सिमित, जो innovative और मूÊय Ǜंखला बढ़ाने वाली पिरयोजना मȂ 
कायर्रत है, िवǄीय सहातया ĢाÃत कर सकती है। युवा सहकार योजना क े तहत शहरी आवास को 
छोड़ कर NCDC को  दी गई िकसी भी Ëयवसाय योजना आ
धािरत गितिविध क े िलए सहायता 
Ģदान की जाती है। उदाहरण Îवरूप क ृिष ĢसंÎकरण आपूिर्त Ǜंखला, मूÊयवधर्न, logistic, क ृिष 
यांितर्क
ीकरण, खुदरा खाǏान्न क े िवपणन, िनवेश, आपूिर्त, वृक्षारोपण, बागवानी, गर्ामीण 
आवासीकरण, कमज़ोर वगर् क े िलए कायर्कर्म, आिदवासी सहकारी सिमितयां, डेयरी, कीटपालन, 
पशुधन, मत्Îय, हथकरघा, क्वायर, जूट, कोष, कीट पालन, कÇÃयूटरीकरण, वÎतर्, पैक्स क े 
बुिनयादी ढांचे, िवपणन सहकािरता की अवसंरच
ना, क ृिष बीमा, जल संरक्षण कायर् सेवाएं, 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
पयर्टन, अितिथ, पिरवहन, अÎपताल, योग वैलनेस सुिवधा, िशक्षा, िबजली उत्पादन तथा 
िवतरण, ऊजार् क े गैर-पारÇपिरक और नवीकरणीय Îतर्ोत का उत्पादन तथा िवतरण आिद क े िलए 
सहायता Ģदान करता है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ms. Dola Sen; fifth supplementary.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Sir, I want to know from th e hon. Minister as to whether there is any 
statistics or data of the Union Government  that through the Cooperative Ministry and 
NCDC how many have become independent to run the show in the last five years.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the questi on is on Yuva Sahakar Scheme in 
Himachal Pradesh.  So you have to confine to that. 
 
सुǛी दोला सेन: ठीक है, कोई बात नहीं, आप िहमाचल Ģदेश का डेटा ही दे दीिजएगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Quick response!  Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी मुरलीध
र मोहोल: महोदय, मȅ आपके  सामने राÍटर्ीय सहकारी िवकास िनगम NCDC की 
Ëयापकता और पहुंच का बड़ा ही िवÎतारपूवर्क जवाब रखूंगा। NCDC ने िविभन्न क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ नई 
योजना शुरू  की है, िजससे Îवयं सहायता समूह क े िलए 'Îवयंशिƪ सहकार', दीघर्कािलक क ृिष 
ऋण क े िलए 'दीघार्विध क ृषक सहक
ार' और डेयरी क े िलए 'डेयरी सहकार'। िवǄीय वषर् 2023-
2024 मȂ NCDC ǎारा 60 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े की िवǄीय सहायता का संिवतरण िकया गया है। 
िवǄीय वषर् 2024-25 मȂ NCDC ने 19,
287.17 करोड़ रुपय े का संिवतरण िकया है। भारत सरकार 
ने NCDC को िविनिर्दÍट िनयमȗ और शतș पर, सरकारी गारंटी क े साथ 2 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े 
मूÊय क े बॉन्ड जारी करने की अनुमित Ģदान की है। इसके  अलावा, NCDC ǎारा पूवȘǄर क े 6 
राज्यȗ - अरुणाचल  Ģदेश, मेघालय, िमजोरम, मिणपुर, नागालȅड और ितर्पुरा, मȂ उप-कायार्लय 
Îथािपत िक
ये जा रहे हȅ। िजनका उǈेÌय िविभन्न राÍटर्ीय योजनाओं को, उनकी सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ को, door step पर ले जाना है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please. ...(Interruptions)... Question No. 19. Shrimati Mahua Maji. 
 
Monitoring of fire safety standards 
 
†*19. SMT. MAHUA MAJI: Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be pleased to state:  
 
                                                            
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
65

 
 
(a) whether Government has taken any strict stand towards  tightening the safety 
standards and preventing negligence to aver t the increasing incidents of fire in 
multi-storey building in the country, if so, the details thereof and if not, the 
reasons therefor; 
(b) whether the Central Government proposes to provide assistance to the States 
to expand and modernize the fire services across the country;  
(c) if so, the details thereof, State-wise; and  
(d) if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI NITYANAND 
RAI): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
Fire Services is a State subject and has been  included as a Munici pal function in the 
XII Schedule of the Constitution of India under Article 243 (W). It is the primary 
responsibility of the State Governments to take necessary measures for strengthening 
and equipping Fire Services and to avert the fire incidences in multi-storey buildings in 
the area of their jurisdiction. However, from time to time, advisories have been issued 
by Directorate General (Fire Services, Civil Defence and Home Guards) under 
Ministry of Home Affairs on 18.04.2017, 31.08.2017, 04.06.2019 and 02.08.2023 for 
prevention and fire safety meas ures in High rise buildings.  In addition, many 
advisories have been issued to States fo r undertaking prevention and fire safety 
measures. 
 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have framed Model Building Bye 
Laws 2016, for guiding the States/UTs for revising their respective Building Bye Laws. 
It also contains a Chapter on fire prot ection and fire safety requirements which 
prescribes the norms and standa rds for fire protection. Its effective enforcement is in 
the domain of the States/UTs. 
 In addition, Bureau of Indian Standard s had also published National Building 
Code of   India, 2016 . It covers the detailed guidelin es for construction, maintenance 
and fire safety of the structures . It also lays down a provision for Fire and Life Safety 
Audit for all buildings having a height of more than 15 meters. 
 The Central Government has launched a "Scheme for Expansion and 
Modernization of Fire Services in the St ates" on 04.07.2023 from the Preparedness 
and Capacity Building Funding Window unde r the National Disaster Response Fund 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(NDRF) for strengthening fire services in the States in the five years (2021-22 to 
2025-26) with a total Central outlay of Rs. 5,000 Crore.  
 The State-wise details of funds allocated  to the States under the scheme, on 
cost sharing basis, is annexed. The identi fied activities under the scheme have been 
broadly categorized under expansion of fi re services and modernization of fire 
services in the States. The m easures included in the scheme provides setting up of 
new fire stations, strengthening of Stat e Training Centres and capacity building, 
provisions for modern fire-fighting equipm ent, strengthening of State Headquarters 
and Urban Fire Stations, technological upgr adation and installation and augmentation 
of online system etc. In addition, an amount  of Rs. 500 crore, out of the total outlay, 
is available to incentivize the States for adoption of legal and infrastructure based 
reforms. 
Annexure  
 
Rs. in Crore 
Sl. No List of States Central 
Share 
State Share Total Allocation 
1 Andhra Pradesh 189.7 63.23 252.93 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 57.57 6.39 63.96 
3 Assam 96.73 10.74 107.47 
4 Bihar 255.69 85.23 340.92 
5 Chhattisgarh 110.82 36.94 147.76 
6 Goa 31.63 10.54 42.17 
7 Gujarat 254.27 84.75 339.02 
8 Haryana 87.48 29.16 116.64 
9 Himachal Pradesh 58.8 6.53 65.33 
10 Jharkhand 111 37.00 148.00 
11 Karnataka 247.42 82.47 329.90 
12 Kerala 122.41 40.80 163.21 
13 Madhya Pradesh 298.15 99.38 397.54 
14 Maharashtra 461.61 153.87 615.48 
15 Manipur 40.5 4.50 45.00 
16 Meghalaya 39.94 4.43 44.37 
17 Mizoram 36 4.00 40.00 
18 Nagaland 36.05 4.00 40.05 
19 Odisha 150.83 50.27 201.10 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
67

 
 
20 Punjab 98.67 32.89 131.56 
21 Rajasthan 293.73 97.91 391.64 
22 Sikkim 29.03 3.22 32.25 
23 Tamil Nadu 280 93.33 373.33 
24 Telangana 142.61 47.53 190.14 
25 Tripura 38.15 4.23 42.38 
26 Uttar Pradesh 577.43 192.47 769.90 
27 Uttarakhand 71.03 7.89 78.92 
28 West Bengal 282.57 94.19 376.76 
  Total 4499.84 1387.99 5887.83 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, देश मȂ बढ़ती अगलगी की घटनाओं से लगातार 
िनदȘष लोगȗ क े जान-माल की क्षित होती जा रही है। गुजरात क े राजकोट क े गेम जोन मȂ लगी 
आग से 27 िनदȘष लोगȗ की जान चली गई। िदÊली क े िववेक िवहार िÎथत baby care centre मȂ 
सात नवजात िशशुओं की मौत हो गई। िसफर् देश की राज
धानी िदÊली की ही बात करȂ, तो 
नवभारत टाइÇस मȂ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your supplementary! 
 
SHRIMATI MAHUA MAJI: Yes, Sir. इस बार गिर्मयȗ मȂ 50 िदनȗ मȂ 4,000 ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, please ask your supplementary. 
 
SHRIMATI MAHUA MAJI: Yes, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are giving facts. Ask your supplementary. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: हमारे देश क े छोटे-बड़े, अगड़े-िपछड़े तमाम राज्
 यȗ क े शहरȗ मȂ बहुत तेजी 
से बहुमंिजला भवनȗ का िनमार्ण हो रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you are reading. 
 
SHRIMATI MAHUA MAJI: This is my question, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please ask your supplementary.   
 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: क्यȗिक अिग्नशमन िवभाग direct Ministry of Home Affairs क े अंडर आता 
है, तो आप यह कहकर िक यह Îटेट का अफे यर है, अपनी िजÇमेदारी Îटेट पर ही नहीं डाल 
सकते। मेरा सवाल यह है िक...(Ëयवधान)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is your supplementary, Madam?   
SHRIMATI MAHUA MAJI: Yes, Sir. अत्याधुिनक अंतरराÍटर्ीय मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  Îटेट 
अिग्नशमन कमर्चािरयȗ क े िलए िकतनी
 Îपेशल टर्ेिंनग की ËयवÎथा क Ȃ दर् की पहल पर िपछले दो 
वषș मȂ की गई है?...(Ëयवधान)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, I will have to ask... I am afraid, don’t force me.  What is 
your supplementary?  Please rise and ask supplementary. 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: सर, मेरा यही सवाल है।  
Ǜी सभापित: मैडम, पहले एक सवाल पूछ लीिजए, िफर दूसरा सवाल भी आ जाएगा।  
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: सर, यही पहला सवाल है िक अत्याधुिनक अंतरराÍटर्ीय
 मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  
Îटेट अिग्नशमन कमर्चािरयȗ क े िलए िकतनी Îपेशल टर्ेिंनग की ËयवÎथा क Ȃ दर् की पहल पर िपछले 
दो वषș मȂ की गई है? 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, I expect a better  supplementary. Please go ahead, hon. 
Minister.   
Ǜी िनत्यान
न्द राय: महोदय, आपदा Ģबंधन राज्य का िवषय है, लेिकन क Ȃ दर् सरकार और गृह 
मंतर्ालय अपनी िजÇमेवािरयȗ से भागते नहीं हȅ। जो भी नुकसान होता है, वह भारत देश क े लोगȗ 
का होता है और हम सब िमलकर आपदा क े Ģबंधन मȂ एक साथ काम करȂ, इस नीित से हम सब 
काम करते हȅ और राज्यȗ क े साथ हम अच्छे से कोऑिर्डनेशन करते हȅ। सर, जहां तक अिग्नशमन 
का िवषय है, तो पहले भी राज्यȗ से अनुरोध िकया गया है और एक मॉडल अिग्नशमन िबल लाया 
गया है, िजसके  तहत अि
ग्नशमन सेवाओं की बदहाली और बढ़ती हुई भूिमका को ध्यान मȂ रखते 
हुए क Ȃ दर् तथा राज्यȗ क े मागर्दशर्न क े िलए एक संशोिधत मॉडल अिग्नशमन िबल, 2019 म Ȃ लाया 
गया था। इस िबल क े बारे मȂ हम इसिलए कहना चाहȂगे, क्यȗिक बहुमंिजला िबिंÊडगȗ क े िवषय मȂ 
कहा गया है, तो मȅ उनको बताना चाहूंगा िक िकतनी टर्ेिंनग और िकस Ģकार से हम उनकी मदद 
कर रहे हȅ। एक बार हम मॉडल िबल क े संबंध मȂ यहां जानकारी दे देना मुनािसब समझते हȅ। इस 
िबल मȂ भवनȗ, संरचनाओं क े िनवारक उपाय, अि
ग्न सुरक्षा उपायȗ का Ģवर्तन जैसी बहुमंिजला 
इमारतȂ, जो 15 मीटर की ऊचांई क
े  िलए अिनवायर् हो, Ģावधान आग बुझाने क े िलए Îवचािलत 
sprinkler system, fire alarm और अिग्नशामक यंतर्ȗ की ËयवÎथा क े Ģावधान का आगर्ह िकया 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
69

 
 
गया है। इसमȂ आग से होने वाली दुघर्टनाओं क े मामलȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए बहुमंिजला और 
िवशेष भवनȗ क े उपĢबंध िकए गए हȅ।  
 महोदय, नागपुर मȂ भारत सरकार क े गृह मंतर्ालय का एक एनएफएससी सिर्वस कॉलेज 
है, िजसने िपछले पांच वषș मȂ 2,274 अिग्नशमन सेवाओं अिधक
ािरयȗ को Ģिशिक्षत िकया है और 
300 से अिधक बी.टेक इंजीिनयसर् तैयार िकए हȅ। िपछले पांच वषș मȂ Ģिशक्षण पाǸकर्मȗ और 
िडगर्ी कायर्कर्मȗ मȂ भागीदारी भी बढ़ाई है। सर, बी.टेक इंजीिनयसर् का, िडवीजनल अिधकारी का, 
Îटेशन अिध
कारी का और एसओ एवं उपअिधकािरयȗ का का िववरण अलग-अलग है और जो 
टेबल है, तो वह टेबल हम आपको ĢÎतुत कर दȂगे। इसमȂ जो अिग्नशमन का मॉडल िबल है, 
उसको अभी तक दस राज्यȗ ने अपनाया है और 17 राज्य इस Ģिकर्
या मȂ आ गए हȅ। लेिकन जहाँ से 
माननीय महोदया आती हȅ, वह झारखंड राज्य अभी तक इस पर एक कदम भी आगे नहीं बढ़ा है। 
महोदय, मेरा इनसे आगर्ह है इस मॉडल अिग्नशमन िबल को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए एक बार अपनी 
राज्य सरकार से कहȂ, तािक अिग्नकांड स
े वहाँ पर कोई नुकसान न हो, इसिलए इस मॉडल िबल 
को वहाँ अपनाएं - महोदय, मेरा उनसे ऐसा आगर्ह है। माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी  भी खुद इसके  िलए 
कई बार आगर्ह कर च
ुक े हȅ। 2023 मȂ जो बैठकȂ हुई थीं, उन्हȗने उनमȂ  भी आगर्ह िकया था।  
महोदय, 2023 क े छठे माह मȂ बैठक हुई थी, सातवȂ माह मȂ माननीय गृह मंतर्ी ǎारा सभी 
म
ुख्य मंितर्यȗ को पतर् िलखे गए थे। सभापित महोदय, मेरा माननीय महोदया से िनवेदन है िक एक 
बार अपने Ģांत मȂ मॉडल अिग्नशमन िबल को अपनाने की और उसके  Ģावधानȗ मȂ आने की क ृपा 
करȂ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask your second supple
mentary.  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: सभापित महोदय, मेरा दूसरा सवाल यही था िक दुघर्टना कम करने हेतु 
कब-कब उच्च Îतरीय बैठकȂ हुई हȅ, उसकी एक िडटेल उपलÅध कराई जाए। 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎया उच्च Îतरीय बैठकȗ क
 े  बारे मȂ ĢÌन पूछ 
रही हȅ, इसके  िलए मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक बहुत बार बैठकȂ हुई हȅ। एक बार घटनाओं मȂ कमी 
आए, आपदा Ģबंधन ठीक से हो, इसके  िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने दस सूतर्ीय एजȂडा, 2016 
म
Ȃ नई िदÊली मȂ आयोिजत आपदा जोिखम न्यूनीकरण पर एिशयाई मंतर्ी Îतरीय सÇमेलन मȂ जो 
एजȂडा िदया था, हम उस पर साल मȂ कई बार बैठते हȅ और कई Îतर पर बैठते हȅ। हम वहाँ पर 
मंतर्ी Îतर पर भी बैठते हȅ और इसमȂ हमारे सिचव भी बैठते हȅ। ये घटनाएं कम करने क े िलए Ģधान 
म
ंतर्ी जी ने जो सूतर् िदए थे, वह एक समावेशी एजȂडा है, िजससे मिहलाओं की सहभािगता हो। 
हमारे पास जो लोकल स
ंसाधन हȅ, उनका डेटा और समय पर उस डेटा का उपयोग, " आपदा 
िमतर्" क े िलए 1 लाख लोगȗ को टर्ेिंनग देने क े िलए िलया गया था, िजसकी टर्ेिंनग लगभग पूरी हो 
गई है। हमने यहाँ पर alert system रखा है। महोदय, जो common alert system है, जो िनिÌचत 
रूप  से आपदाओं को पहले  alarm करता है, हम उस पर काम करते हȅ। न्यूयाकर् मȂ संयुƪ राÍटर् 
जलवायु कारर्वाई िशखर सÇमेलन - महोदय, आपदा पर ĢÌन पूछा है, िसफर् अिग्नशमन पर नहीं 
प
ूछा है, इसिलए मȅ बोल रहा हूं िक जलवायु कारर्वाई िशखर सÇमेलन मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा 
आपदा Ģितरोधी संरचना संगठन, सीडीआरआई का शुभारंभ भी िकया गया। अभी तक उनतालीस 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
देश और सात अन्य संगठन इसके  सदÎय बने हȅ, जो भारत क े आपदा Ģबंधन और दृिÍटकोण क े 
संबंध मȂ एक बड़ी उपलिÅध है।  
महोदय, राÍटर्ीय िरमोट सȂिंसग सȂटर ǎारा अिधक और कम बाढ़ वाले क्षेतर् का एटलस 
जारी िकया गया है। चकर् पात जोिखम शमन और मोचन क े िलए एक वेबसाइट आधािरत Dynamic 
Composite Risk Atlas एवं Decision Support System िवकिसत िकया गया है। गृह मंतर्ालय क े 
तहत Standing Fire Council की बैठक हर साल की जाती है, िजसमȂ सभी राज्यȗ क े अिग्न सेवा 
अध्यक्ष भाग लेते हȅ। जो फायर से संबंिधत संÎथाएं हȅ, वे सभी इसमȂ भाग लेती हȅ। महोदय, मȅ इनसे 
यह जरूर  कहना चाहूंगा िक जो िसÎटम यहाँ पर अपनाया गया है, उसमȂ हमȂ बहुत सारी 
उपलिÅधयाँ ĢाÃत हुई हȅ और आपदा Ģबंधन क े िलए सरकार ने उसके  Ģबंधन मȂ रािश को भी महत्व 
िदया है। ....(Ëयवधान)..
. महोदय, मȅ लाÎट बात बताना चाहता हूं। ....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Sanjay Singh, third supplementary. You have given a very 
comprehensive answer, a very comprehensive answer. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक आपने अलाऊ कर िदया है। 
सर, उन्हȗने कहा है िक अिग्नशमन राज्यȗ का िवषय है और माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने 28 राज्यȗ का 
Åयोरा िदया है, इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चा
हता हूं िक क्या देश की 
राजधानी िदÊली मȂ नागिरक नहीं रहते हȅ, क्या देश की राज धानी िदÊली मȂ अिग्नशमन सेवा क े 
िलए आपकी ओर क े िकसी तरह क े सहयोग की कोई जरूरत  नहीं है, क्या आप िदÊली क े 
नागिरकȗ को नागिरक नहीं समझते हȅ? 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सभापित महोदय, मȅने पहले ही कहा है िक हम अपनी िजÇमेवारी से भागते 
नहीं हȅ, लेिकन यह राज्
य का िवषय है और हम उन्हȂ सहयोग करते हȅ। सर, हम राज्यȗ को क ै से 
सहयोग करते हȅ, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ बताना चाहता हूं। अभी मȅ यही बता रह ा था िक िकस Ģकार से 
33,581 करोड़ क े िवǄीय Ģावधान को बढ़ाकर 4 गुना िकया गया है... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
71

 
 
GENERAL DISCUSSION 
 
*The Union Budget, 2024-25 
& 
*The Budget of Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Union Budget 2024-25 and the Budget of Union Territory of 
Jammu & Kashmir 2024-25 to be discussed together.   
 I call upon former Finance Minister, Shri P. Chidambaram, to raise the 
discussion.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: The best Finance Minister ever! ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Ch airman, Sir, I want to thank the hon. 
Finance Minister for the Employment-Lin ked Incentive Scheme and other ideas 
incorporated in the early part of her speech. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please hear him patiently.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM: I am particularly ha ppy that she had an opportunity to read 
the Congress Manifesto and she picks the good ideas on page 11, page 30, and page 
31. I would respectfully urge my hon. friend s in the Treasury Benches, especially the 
External Affairs Minister, to read the Congress manifesto so that in your party 
meetings you can persuade the hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Finance Minister to 
take some more ideas from our manifesto. We will be very, very happy to support you 
if you take those ideas. Copying is not proh ibited in this House. In fact, copying is 
encouraged, copying is rewarded in this House.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Just a minute. If you will address the Chair, it will give a soothing 
feeling to me also. And, that will be mo re appropriate, Mr. Chidambaram.    
...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM: Copying is encouraged and copying is rewarded in this 
House.  So, please copy a little more.   
                                                            
* Discussed together.   
 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 Sir, I have four major things. And, I th i n k ,  I  s h o u l d  b e  a b l e  t o  c o m p l e t e  m y  
submissions on each of these th ings in about four or five minutes. The first is jobs.  
Unemployment is the biggest challenge to day. The Centre for monitoring Indian 
economy has estimated all-India unemployment rate, in June 2024, as 9.2 per cent.  
It may have come down. Earlier, there wa s a Production-Linked Incentive. When you 
introduce the Employment-Linked Incentive, it must be for some reason. And, I 
suspect, the reason was that the Producti on-Linked Incentive Scheme did not create 
the kind of jobs that you wanted to create . So, will the hon. Finance Minister tell this 
House what is the outcome of the PLI? On ce we know the outcome of the PLI, we 
can look ahead to what can be expected of the ELI. In fact, from paragraphs 20, 21, 
and 22, read with paragraph 51 of her speech, neither I nor any of my learned 
colleagues are able to get a whole picture of the ELI. It seems to us that paragraph 20 
talks about the same target industries, lik e paragraph 21. And, paragraph 21 talks 
about the same target industries as para graph 22. But in para graph 51, we were 
suddenly let down when you said, "Only 5 00 industries are selected." The numbers 
do not gel; the numbers do no t match. Anyway, you have a ELI. It is an interesting 
idea, but it does not inspire confidence and let me go on record t o say it do es not 
inspire confidence that you w ill be able to place 290 lakhs people under the ELI, that 
you have described. It should not turn out to be another election jumla like your two 
crore jobs a year. …(Interruptions).. Now, look at the magnitude of the 
unemployment problem. The Uttar Prad esh Police Department conducted an 
examination for 60,244 vacancies. About 48  lakh persons applied and wrote that 
examination. It was cancelled a couple of da ys later. The Air India wanted to fill 2,216 
vacancies for handyman to do diverse jobs like repair and maintenance. About 25,000 
people thronged Mumbai airport for a walk-in interview and the police had been called 
to restore law and order. A private company in  Gujarat sought to fill five positions.   
About 1,000 persons barged in to that company. Madhya Pradesh advertised 15 low-
skilled Government jobs; 11,000 applications were received. Among them were post-
graduates, engineers, MBAs and I am sad to say, even one of them was a person 
who had just written an examination to be  a judge in the Madhya Pradesh Courts.  
The best illustration is of the Staff Selection Commission . There are Staff Selection 
Commissions of the Centre and the States. Uttar Pradesh conducted an examination 
for 7,500 posts. About 24,74,030 people a pplied for those jobs. And, yet, the RBI, 
about two or three weeks ago said, “There is no job crisis in India ”. Exact words are 
“No job crisis in India. ” Why didn’t anyone from the Mi nistry or any officer stand up 
and say, we reject this statement! The RBI is supposed to be cau tious, conservative 
and neutral. You are cautious, you are conservative but you are not neutral at all. I 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
73

 
 
suggest that unemployment be taken seriousl y, and we will wait for the outcome of 
your ELI scheme. It is an interesting sche me. At the moment, I am not impressed, I 
am not convinced; the outcome alone will judge whether your intentions are good, 
whether you really want to tackle unemployment.   
 Sir, the second broad subject is inflation. The hon. Finance Minister, in Para 3 
of her speech dismissed the subject in te n words. And, I am not exaggerating.  
Please go through the speech - exactly 10 words. Is inflation such a trivial subject that 
you can deal with it casually and dismiss it in ten words? The WPI inflation is 3.4 per 
cent; the CPI inflation is 5.1 per cent and food inflation is 9.4 per cent. From where do 
you collect data? Mostly, along towns and v illages abutting the national highway; at 
best, the State Highways and at best, the Dist rict Highway. But go into the hinterland 
o f  I n d i a ,  g o  i n t o  t h e  K B K  d i s t r i c t s  o f  O d i sha, go into the interi ors of Dharmapuri or 
Ramanathapuram, the inflation is much higher  than your 3.4 per cent or 5.1 per cent 
or 9.4 per cent. And the Chief Economic Advisor who may be cautious, conservative 
-- he has a degree of autonomy which no other officer of the Government of India has 
-- said in his Economic Survey, “ India’s inflation continues to be low, stable and 
moving towards the four per cent target. ”  It has been moving for the last four years. 
When will it arrive at the four per cent target?  Is inflation low?  Is it stable? Is it 
moving towards the four per cent target?  If  it is moving towards the four per cent 
target, why has the RBI not revised downward the bank rate fixed in June, 2023? This 
is the thirteenth month of a 6.5 per cent ba nk rate. Bank rate is the good measure of 
where inflation is moving. If inflation is moving towards the four per cent target, – four 
per cent target is actually four plus or minu s two; it is not four per cent – assuming 
that four per cent is the target, why is th e RBI keeping the bank rate at 6.5 per cent 
for the last thirteen months? Why is the MPC, the Monetary Policy Committee, not 
willing to revise it downwards? And, I think,  what the Chief Economic Advisor said in 
his Economic Survey is injury, and the hon.  Finance Minister, dismissing the subject 
in ten words, is adding insult to injury. Inflation is a humiliating situation because every 
family is hit by inflation. I warn this Government. You are taking inflation not seriously. 
The last set of by-elections punished you. You will not agree. But I think the last set of 
by-elections where out of 13 seats, 10 seats were won by the India bloc is a 
punishment, the warning administered to you, and if you don’t take inflation seriously, 
you will be punished more. If you want to suffer the punishment, you are welcome to 
suffer the punishment. And, in this situation,  you claim that the growth last year was 
8.2 per cent, and, this year, it will be 6.5 per cent or 7 per cent. I am not going into 
the macro-economic analysis. Some of my co lleagues will do that. I ask you, how do 
you arrive at this growth rate? You take th e nominal growth rate and apply a deflator 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
and arrive at the GDP. Sir, the House and yo u must know that the deflator that they 
have adopted for the manufacturing sector for last year is 1.7. When wholesale 
inflation is 3.4, when CPI inflation is 5.1,  food inflation is 9.4, how do you adopt a 
deflator of 1.7?  In fact, I want the hon. Finance Minister to tell us what is the deflator 
you have adopted for manufacturing industry, what is the deflator you have adopted 
for industry and for agriculture and what is the deflator you have adopted for services. 
Nominal growth is measurable. But your GDP, in real terms, is simply by adopting a 
deflator. And if you adopt a deflator, wh ich several knowledgeable economists and 
experts throughout the world have severely cr iticized for the last three or four years, 
you will arrive at this rosy pi cture. If you would have adopte d a deflator less than 1.7, 
you would not have arrived at 8.2; you wo uld have arrived at 9.2. If you adopt a 
deflator of 0.5, you will even cross 10 per cent. So, please tell us, what is the deflator 
you are adopting, why you are adopting it and tell us what is the nominal growth rate 
and how do you arrive at these growth rates. These growth rates cannot be seen, but 
these growth rates can be felt by the pe ople. Anyone moving among the people will 
know. The growth rate can be felt by the people. When there is impressive growth, 
when there are more goods an d services, when prices are affordable, when there is 
money floating around in the market, when  your pockets are jingling with coins or 
currency notes, you get the feeling that things are going alright in this country. Do you 
get that feeling? I travel at least 500-1,000 kilometers every month by road; I don't get 
that feeling. Does any hon. Member from hi s constituency or State get the feeling, or 
do people tell him that 'things are very good ', please go and tell the Prime Minister in 
Delhi that things are very  good and we are very happy? '  Does anyone get that 
feeling? 
 Sir, the third subject is wages. Now, this is a serious matter. The hon. Finance 
Minister said, 'I have given relief'. Who has she given relief to? I don't grudge the 
relief.  She has given relief, but to whom?  In 2022-23, the last figure I was able to 
access, the number of taxpayers was 7.4 cror e. It may have increased to 8 or 8.5 
crore. Out of that, 65 per cent had zero tax lia bility. They file a return, but no tax is 
paid. Assuming that the 65 per cent remains constant, out of, say, eight or nine crore 
tax payers today, five-and-a-half to six cr ore people would have zero tax liability.  
You have given relief to people who moved to the new tax regime. I have seen various 
calculations in the new tax regime. Each paper has got a calculation. I have a 
Chartered Accountant who has given me a cal culation from Gujarat, and he is very 
knowledgeable.  He says that the relief give n is between Rs. 9,651 to Rs. 17,651.  To 
whom -- to these two to three crore people.  India does not consist of just these two 
to three crore people. There are 142 crore people in this country. Out of 142 crore 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
75

 
 
people, let us assume you have given relie f to two-three crore people. What about 
the rest? Do you know the conditions of the rest? The household consumption 
expenditure survey of the Government of In dia, read with that the bottom 50 per cent 
have three per cent of the national wealth , 13 per cent of the national income, the 
monthly consumption of a person in the rural areas is Rs. 3,094.  Multiply it by 12, you 
would arrive at about Rs. 37,000 a year. In ur ban areas it is Rs. 4,963.  Multiply it by 
12, it comes to Rs. 60,000 a year. So, we ha ve 50 per cent of the population, that is 
71 crore, having an annual consumptio n expenditure between Rs. 36,000 and Rs. 
50,000. Are they rich or poor? This is the bottom 50, below the median. If you go 
down to the bottom 20, or go down to the bottom 10, they are even poorer. What is 
the relief for them?  And, the Chief Executive Officer of the NITI Aayog says, India has 
virtually abolished poverty. Poverty cannot be more than five per cent. Poverty cannot 
be more than five per cent when you are talking about 71 crore people? Thankfully, 71 
crore is not five per cent. Then India's population would be 1,400 crore. India’s 
population is 142 crore. One-half is 71 crore, and they are below the median, and this 
is the median income. I ask the hon. Fina nce Minister: what is the relief given to 
them? Do you know that most of them are daily labourers? Thirty crore daily 
labourers are there in this country. The ot hers are doing irregular jobs. The regular 
jobs are only for about 17 to 25 per cent pe ople of this country. All the rest are doing 
irregular jobs or daily labour . What is the relief given to them? In the World Hunger 
Index of 125 countries, we are at 111 th place. You may not accept the World Hunger 
Index, but the action that the Government ha s taken, namely, giving free foodgrain to 
81 crore people, is a tacit admission that on  the Hunger Index, we are very, very low.  
Look at the Hunger Index, your own action shows that 81 crore people cannot afford 
food.   
 Sir, my last subject is federalism. What do we see around this country? All-
India Service officers defy the directions an d orders of the Council of Ministers of an 
elected Government in Delhi.  Funds are wi thheld from Kerala and West Bengal on 
one pretext or the other. Borrowing limits of non-BJP State Governments have been 
slashed. Tamil Nadu has been denied Disaster Relief Assistance. I ask:  why does the 
UPSC have to play a role in the appointm ent of the DGP of a State? Why should a 
State Government not appoint the Vice-Chan cellors of State Universities? And, how 
did this Government treat Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Odisha before April? The same 
demand was there. The same Andhra Prad esh Re-organisation Act was there. The 
Chief Minister was a different person. The same Act was there, but for ten years, how 
did you treat them? For ten years, how did you treat Bihar? When a leader wears one 
cap, you treat him one way, but when he changes that cap and he wears another 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
cap, you treat him another way. I don’t grudge at all if you are giving relief to Andhra 
Pradesh or Bihar, but what ab out the other States?  We ar e a federal country. This is 
the death knell of federalism, if you pick  and choose amongst the States. You are the 
Union of India. You are the Union Govern ment. You are the Government of all the 
States. You cannot pick and choose one State and deny relief to another State.   
 Finally, I thought the hon. Finance Minister loved Tamil. I missed her quotes 
from either Thiruvalluvar or  any another other classic lit erature. Maybe she did not 
have time to quote from a classic poet in Telugu or in Bhojpuri. Maybe she will quote 
in the course of time. I want her to remember that she was born in Madurai, she had 
her schooling in Villupuram and she did he r college in Tiruchirappalli and it is very 
painful, as the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu  pointed out, that not in one place in her 
60-page speech, did she mention the word ‘Tamil Nadu’ or ‘Tamil’.  I am not saying, 
mention only Tamil Nadu; mention all the St ates or mention all the States grouped 
together. How many times ha ve you mentioned Bihar? How many times have you 
mentioned Andhra Pradesh? I have no grud ge, but please remember that there are 
other States in India. Other States have people. Other States elect other 
Governments. They voted against you.  Please remember that.    
Finally, Sir, I have five demands, and, I would urge the hon. Finance Minister to 
copy from our manifesto. Sir, I demand th is and I respectfully ask the hon. Finance 
Minister to give us answers. If you do not answer this today or in the course of this 
Session or subsequently, it is not as if  these demands will die down. These demands 
will echo everywhere in India where the INDIA bloc has the right to speak and write. 
 Our first demand is Minimum Wage of  Rs. 400/- per day for every kind of 
employment. Two, we demand a legally- guaranteed MSP. Th ree, we demand a 
write-off of the unpaid balance of interest or  instalment of educational loans given up 
to March, 2024. Four, we demand abolition, complete  abolition, of the Agniveer 
Scheme, and, five, we demand that NEET be  scrapped, and, if some States want to 
keep NEET, exempt all other States which do not want NEET. These five demands 
will echo not only in this Chamber but thes e will echo throughout the country until you 
concede these demands. I demand that th e hon. Finance Minister reply to my 
demand that she should reply to these issues. Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal.  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय राÍटर्ीय 
अध्यक्ष और सभा क े नेता जगत Ģकाश नƿा जी का आभारी हूं, िजन्हȗने मुझे पाटीर् की ओर से 
िवचार रखने की अनुमित Ģदान की है।  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
77

 
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 महोदय, हम लोग जब िवǄ क े बारे मȂ बोलना शुरू  करते हȅ, तो हमारे सामने िबÇब होते हȅ। 
एक िबÇब होता है भारत का - वह भारत िजसे हम अपनी मां मानते हȅ, िजसके  बारे मȂ हमारे शाÎतर् 
कहते हȅ - 
"माता भूिम: पुतर्ोऽहं पृिथËया:।" 
 
हज़ारȗ साल पहले िजसके  बारे मȂ िलखा गया -  
"उǄरं यÞ समुदर्Îय िहमादर्ेǙैव दिक्षणç।  
वषȊ तà भारतं नाम भारती यतर् सन्तितः ।।" 
 
 समुदर् क े उǄर मȂ और िहमालय क े दिक्षण मȂ जो देश है उसे भारत कहते हȅ और हम भारत 
क े पुतर् हȅ, भारत क े बच्चे हȅ, इसिलए भारतीय कहे जाते हȅ।  
 दूसरा िबÇब होता है हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का। 26 मई, 2014 को उन्हȗने पहली बार शपथ 
ली और हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक दुिनया की अके ली शिख्सयत Îवगीर्य नेहरू  जी क े बाद, 
िजन्हȗने लगातार तीसरी बार शपथ लेने का काम सफलता क े साथ िकया। महोदय, माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी जब शपथ ले रहे थे, तो दो Ģकार की शपथ ले रहे थे। एक संवैधािनक शपथ, जो 
इस देश क े महामिहम राÍटर्पित िदलवा रहे थे, एक दूसरी भी शपथ वे ले रहे थे - मȅ अगर 
Ģधानमंतर्ी बना हूं तो मेरे काम करने की दृिÍट क्या होगी, मेरी आिर्थक नीितयां क्या हȗगी - और 
वह शपथ उन्हȂ नरȂदर् नाम का एक दूसरा नौजवान िदला रहा था, उसका नाम था नरȂदर्नाथ दǄ 
िववेकानंद। िववेकानंद बोल रहे थे और माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी मन मȂ ही उनके  शÅदȗ को दोहरा 
रहे थे। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी कह रहे थे, 'मȅ नहीं भूलूंगा िक मेरा िववाह, िक मेरी संपिǄ, िक मेरा जीवन 
मेरे Ëयिƪगत भोग िवलास क े िलए या इंिदर्य सुखȗ क े िलए हुआ है, मेरे Ëयिƪगत सुख क े िलए 
हुआ है, मȅ नहीं भूलूंगा िक मेरा यह समाज उस िवराट महामाया की एक छाया मातर् है, मȅ नहीं 
भूलूंगा िक भारत क े िजतने भी नागिरक हȅ, चाहे वे अिशिक्षत हȗ, गरीब हȗ, दिलत हȗ, िपछड़े हȗ - 
मȅ भारतवासी हूं और ये सारे नागिरक भारतवासी हȅ, ये हमारे पिरवार क े सदÎय हȅ, इनका सुख 
और दु:ख हमारा सुख और दु:ख होगा। मȅ नहीं भूलूंगा इस बात को िक जब तक यह जीवन है, यह 
धरती हमारे िलए Îवगर् है और भारत का कÊयाण ही हमारा कÊयाण है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़ सीट पर बैठ कर न बोलȂ। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: इसी सपने को लेकर मȅ गवर् क े साथ कह सकता हूं िजस यातर्ा को 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने वषर् 2014 मȂ शुरू  िकया, हम गवर् क े साथ कहते हȅ िक तब से 2024 तक 
वह यातर्ा उनकी अनवरत जारी है। महोदय, आज माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी बात कर रहे थे। आज से 
60 साल पहले रामधारी िंसह िदनकर ने देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा क े बारे मȂ िक िलखा था िक-  
 
 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
"क ु छ समझ नहीं पड़ता, रहÎय यह क्या है! 
जानȂ, भारत मȂ बहती कौन हवा है 
धरती क े सब पेड़ दीन-दुबर्ल हȅ 
गमलȗ क े ही पेड़ सुदÇय-सुदल हȅ, 
जब तक है यह वैषÇय समाज सड़ेगा, 
िकस तरह एक हो कर यह देश लड़ेगा। 
सबसे पह
ले यह दुिरत-मूल काटो रे! 
समतल पीटो, खाइयां-खƾ पाटो रे! 
बहु पाद बटȗ की शीरा शोर छांटȗ रे। 
जो िमले अमृत, सब को समान बांटो रे!" 
                                 
 माननीय पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी भाषण दे रहे थे। वे वतर्मान की नीित यȗ क े बारे मȂ बता रहे थे।  1960 
मȂ रामधारी िंसह िदनकर भारत की िÎथित क े बारे मȂ बखान कर रहे थे और ऐसा लग रहा था िक 
वतर्मान से इनका कोई संबंध ही न हो। इन्हȗने 65 साल राज िकया। 65 सालȗ क े रहते हुए रामध ारी 
िंसह िदनकर की इस पीढ़ा को िंकिचत मातर् भी अगर इन्हȗने बदला होता, तो शायद आज ये बातȂ 
इन्हȂ दोहराने की जरूरत  नहीं पड़ती। इसिलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी जब सǄा पर आए, तो 
उनकी Ģाथिमकता थे- देश का गरीब हमारी Ģा
थिमकता होगी, देश का नौजवान हमारी 
Ģाथिमकता होगा, देश की बहनȂ हमारी Ģाथिमकता हȗगी, देश का िकसान हमारी Ģाथिमकता 
होगा और हम सब गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक िजत नी  नीितयां उन्हȗने बनाई, हम नाम पर नाम 
ले सकते हȅ, उनकी उपलिÅधयȗ को िगना सकते हȅ। पहली बार जब वे ' जन धन योजना' लेकर 
आए थे, आप तो 65 सालȗ मȂ नहीं ला पाए, आप तो इस बात की िंचता नहीं कर पाए िक इस देश मȂ 
53 परसȂट ऐसे लोग हȅ, ि
जन्हȗने बȅक का मुंह तक नहीं देखा था। इस देश को हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी का 
आभारी होना चािहए, िजन्हȗने इस बात को तय िकया िक भारत का एक भी नागिरक, िजसके  पास 
एक पैसा नहीं होगा, हम उसे बȅक तक पहुंचाएंगे, िबना Åयाज क े पहुचा
एंगे, जीरो बैलȂस पर 
अकाउंट खोलȂगे, उसके  अकाउंट मȂ पांच हजार रुपय े डालȂगे, उसे बचत करने की कला िसखाएंगे 
और देश क े िवकास मȂ उसक ी िहÎसेदारी करȂगे।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज, पीछे बैठकर न बोलȂ। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: सर, इन्हȗने 65 सालȗ मȂ अपने देश क े नागिरकȗ को, बहनȗ को 
गांव मȂ रात क े अंधेरे मȂ शौचालय मȂ जाने क े िल
 ए मजबूर िकया। अपनी इज्जत बचाने क े िलए, 
िविभन्न Ģकार की समÎयाओं का सामना करने क े िलए मजबूल िकया। आप इस मंच पर खड़े 
होकर आज भाषण देते हो। मिहलाओं की जो बेइज्जती आपने 65 साल  मȂ इस देश मȂ की है, तो 
भारत  । आपको माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का एहसान मानना चािहए, िजन्हȗने इस देश मȂ 'Îवच्छ 
भारत योजना' Ģारंभ की और आज हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक भारत की कोई भी      
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
79

 
 
मिहला, कोई भी  बच्चा, कोई भी बूढ़ा आज अपने घर से िनकलकर रात क े अंधेरे मȂ सड़कȗ पर 
शौचालय जाने क े िलए बाध्य नहीं हो सकता है।  आपको  आनी चािहए, आप 65 साल सǄा मȂ रहे।  
सर, 3,70,000,00 ऐसे घर थे, िजन तक आप पीने का पानी पहुंचा सके । आप बात करते हȅ आधे 
लोगȗ की, आप 140 करोड़ जनसंख्या की बताते हȅ। आपने 3,70,000,00 घरȗ को पीने का पानी 
पहुंचाया था। आपको Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का आभारी होना चािहए, िजन्हȗने 'जल जीवन िमशन' शुरू  
िकया। िजनके  नेतृत्व मȂ आज हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक 14 क
रोड़ घरȗ मȂ हमने पीने का 
पानी पहुंचाने का काम िकया है।  आपको   नहीं आती िक इस देश की 90 Ģितशत जनता ईलाज 
नहीं करा पाती थी, िचिकत्सा तक उसकी पहुंच नहीं होती थी। ईलाज कराने मȂ वह गरीबी रेखा क े 
नीचे चली जाती थी, उनके  घर तक िबक जाते थे, उनकी जमीने िबक जाती थी। आप उनक ी  िंचता 
नहीं करते थे।  अगर िकसी ने िंचता की, तो  भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने की। िजन्हȗने 
यह तय िकया िक इस देश का कोई भी गरीब पैसे की कमी क े नाते नहीं मरेगा। उसके  िलए 
'आयुÍमान भ ारत ' योजना शुरू  हुई। 50 करोड़  नागिरकȗ को आच्छािदत िकया गया और हम गवर् 
क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक िपछले पांच सालȗ क े अंदर 7 करोड़ 34 लाख लोगȗ ने अÎपताल मȂ 
अपना ईलाज करवाया।   
महोदय, मȅ आपके  सामने एक िरपोटर् ĢÎतुत करता हूं। यह िरपोटर् Standard & Poor की 
है। जब चुनाव चल रहे थे और िनणर्य आने वाला था, तो 29 मई को यह िरपोटर् आई थी। यह छोटी-
मोटी संÎथा नहीं है। पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी जी इसको नकार नहीं सकते हȅ।  महत्वपूणर् यह नहीं है िक 
उन्हȗने भारत की रेिंटग बढ़ा दी। 2009 मȂ भारत की रेिंटग -BBB थी, जब आपकी सरकार थी।  
2012 मȂ भारत की रेिंटग -BBB थी , जब भी आपक
ी सरकार थी। वषर् 2014 मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
सरकार मȂ आये और आते ही भारत की रेिंटग चार महीने क े अंदर बदल गई तथा यह बीबी 
माइनस से बीबी Îटेबल हो गई। हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक 29 मई , 2014  को Standard 
and Poor's ने घोषणा की और भारत की रेिंटग बीबी माइनस, बीबी Îटेबल से बदलकर बीबी 
पॉिजिटव हो गई। महोदय, यह महत्व
पूणर् नहीं है, महत्वपूणर् यह है िक ऐसा करते हुए, Standard 
and Poor's ने अपनी िरपोटर् मȂ क्या कहा। मȅ उस िरपोटर् को पढ़ना चाहूंगा। उन्हȗने िलखा िक 
भारत क े मजबूत आिर्थक िवकास ने, भारत की ऋणगर्ािहता पर सकारात् मक Ģभाव डाला है। इस 
सुदृढ़ आिर्थक ढांचे का आने वाले दो-तीन सालȗ मȂ िवकास की गित पर बहुत Ģभावीय असर पड़ने 
वाला है। उन्हȗने िलखा िक सरकार ने अपने खचȃ क े Îवरूप और उसके  िवत रण को पूरी तरह से 
बदल िदया है और बढ़ता हुआ िहÎसा, अवÎथापन िवकास पर खचर् िकया जा रहा है। आने वाले 
समय मȂ यह भारत की जड़ता को समाÃत कर देगा और भारत को िवकास की बहुत ऊ ंचाइयȗ  पर 
लेकर जाएगा। उन्हȗने िलखा िक लगातार नीितगत Îथाियत्व से, गहराते हुए आिर्थक सुधारȗ से 
और उच्च दर की अवÎथापन सुिव
धाओं क े िनवेश से, भारत लÇबे समय तक िवकास की 
संभावनाओं को बनाता रहेगा। भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा का पहला तमाचा, जो आपके  ऊपर है, जो 
आरोप आप लोग हमारे ऊपर लगाते हȅ, उस कÇपनी ने िलखा  है िक भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा ने 
कोिवड की आपदा क े बाद बहुत Ģभावशाली ढंग से वापसी की है। िपछले तीन साल मȂ भारत क े 
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
वाÎतिवक आिर्थक िवकास की दर और सकल घरेलू उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ सवार्िधक 8.1 Ģितशत की 
औसत से वृिǉ हुई है। भारत एिशया पैिसिफक क्षेतर् मȂ सवार्िधक िवकासशील है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज, सीट पर बैठकर बात न करȂ। Ãलीज, अपनी-अपनी सीटȗ पर जाकर बैठ 
जाइए।  
 
डा. रा
धा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: आने वाले तीन सालȗ मȂ यह िवकास की िदशा और गित बनी 
रहेगी। भारत 7 Ģितशत की िवकास दर से िवकास करता रहेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please move to your seats. This is my request. आप बैठकर 
आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। Please go to your seat. Priyanka ji,  go to your seat. Please go to 
your seat.   
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: भारत क े सकल घरेलू उत्पादन और ऋण क े अनुपात मȂ इसका 
Ģभावी Ģभाव पड़ेगा। महोदय, दूसरा तमाचा इनके  गाल पर Standard and Poor's ने मारा है। 
उसने िलखा है, यह उनके  शÅद हȅ, वषर् 2024-25 मȂ  मो
दी  सरकार ने अवÎथापना क े िवकास मȂ 11 
लाख 11 हजार करोड़ रुपए  खचर् िकए हȅ अथार्त जीडीपी का 3.4 परसȂट है। अगला वाक्य उन्हȗने 
िलखा है, यह हम नहीं कह रहे हȅ, भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े लोग नहीं कर रहे हȅ, हमारे अथर्शाÎतर्ी 
नहीं कह रहे हȅ,  Standard and Poo r's ने िलखा, आज से 10 साल पहले िकसकी सरकार थी, 
आप ध्यान दीिजएगा। आज से 10 साल पहले खचर् से यह साढ़े चार गुना अिधक है और भारत 
इमिजȊग एंड डेवलिंपग इकोनॉमी का 'Best Performing State'  है। उनकी अगली िटÃपणी यह थी 
िक आप ईपी
एफओ को नहीं मानते, आपको एक िनजी संÎथा सीएमआई की िरपोटर् समझ मȂ आती 
है। मुझे आÌचयर् होता है िक आप भारत सरकार क े िवǄ मंतर्ी रहे हȅ, आपने शासन िकया है, 
लेिकन आप आरबीआई को नकारते हȅ। उसी आरब ीआई क े सहारे, वे िवǄ मंतर्ी बने रहे हȗगे।  
आज िकतनी अनैितकता है िक उसी आरबीआई क े आधार पर – इन्हȗने ही आरबीआई क े गवनर्र 
बनाए हȗगे, आज उसी आरबीआई की िरपोटर् को चुनौती दे रहे हȅ। आरबीआई और ईपीएफओ 
आज रोजगार की बात कर
ते हȅ। वषर् 2017 क े पहले यह सरकार रोजगार की गणना ही नहीं कराती 
थी, वे सामने बैठे हȅ, िहÇमत होगी तो खुद ही जबाव दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, वे गलत बोल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयव
 धान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप चेयर को एडर्ेस किरए।  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: पांच साल मȂ एक बार रोजगार की गणना होती थी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आज हम गवर् कर सकते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िसफर् डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल जी की बात िरक
 ॉडर् पर जाएगी।   
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
81

 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: 2017 क े बाद भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने तय िकया िक हर तीन 
महीने मȂ रोजगार की गणना की जाएगी। ईपीएफओ क े आंकड़ȗ को आप िनकािलएगा। Standard 
and Poor's की िरपोटर् को दुिनया की सारी संÎथाएं मानती हȅ। वे सीएमआई क े फजीर् आंकड़ȗ को 
नहीं मानती, वे ईपीएफओ क े आंकड़ȗ को ही मानत
ी हȅ। उन्हȗने ईपीएफओ क े आंकड़ȗ क े आधार 
पर िलखा िक ईपीएफओ क े आंकड़े से पता चलता है, आप ध्यान से सुिनएगा, ईपीएफओ क े 
आंकड़े से पता चलता है िक मजदूरȗ की शिƪ बढ़ ी है, फारमसर् क े रोजगार मȂ 11.4 Ģितशत की 
वृिǉ हुई है। Îवाभािवक रूप  से आने वाले समय मȂ भारत की मांग बढ़ने वाली है। महोदय, मȅ अब 
चौथी िटÃपणी पर कहूंगा।  
महोदय, जीएसटी लाने वाले ये ही थे। ये लागू नहीं कर पाए, हमने लागू कर िदया, तो 
आज जीएसटी को िवक
ास िवरोधी बताते हȅ। क्या कहा था Îटȅडड्सर् एंड पुअसर् ने? उसने जीएसटी 
की आलोचना करने वालȗ को सही जवाब िदया। भारत ने 2017 मȂ जीएसटी इिÇÃलमȂट िकया और 
तब से इसका मीठा फल खा रहा है। 2024 मȂ 11.07 Ģितशत की वृिǉ से 20 लाख करोड़ रुपय े 
जीएसटी मȂ इकƻा हुआ है, यह राजÎव बढ़ता रहेगा और भार
त का िवकास भी बढ़ता रहेगा।  
माननीय पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदय PLI Îकीम पर िटÃपणी कर रहे थे। Îटȅडड्सर् एंड पुअसर् मȂ 
पीएलआई (Productivit
y Linked Incentive) का उÊलेख िकया है। उन्हȗने िलखा है िक 
पीएलआई Îकीम ने भारत मȂ electronics, information technology, automobile और उसके  
क ंपोनȂट पर बहुत अिधक धन आवंिटत िकया है। इससे भारत क े उत्पादन सेक्टर मȂ िवदेशी िनवेश 
बढ़ा है और बहुत-सी िव
देशी फमȄ भारत की ओर आकिर्षत हुई हȅ। उन्हȗने भारत क े आपदा काल 
क े बारे मȂ िलखा है। आप भारत क े िफÎकल डेिफिसट की िंचता कर रहे थे, 2012-13 मȂ, जब आपने 
िवǄ मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ सरकार छोड़ी थी, तो भारत का िफÎकल डेिफिसट 10.05 परसȂट था। आपको 
आंकड़े बहुत याद रहते हȅ, इसिलए आप याद कीिजएगा िक 2012-13 मȂ भारत का िफÎकल 
डेिफिसट 10.05 परसȂट था। यिद नह ीं होगा, तो आप खड़े होकर चुनौती दीिजएगा। महोदय, 
उन्हȗने िलखा है िक भारत का िफÎकल डेिफिसट आपदा काल मȂ 9 से 13 परसȂट था, 2024 मȂ 5 से 
5.07 परसȂट हुआ, 2025 मȂ 5.01 परसȂट और 2028 तक 4.05 परस Ȃट होगा और लगता है िक 
2028 मȂ यह घाटा घटकर 4.02 Ģितशत हो जाएग
ा।  
उपसभापित महोदय, इनकी एक और बहुत िĢय संÎथा है। 1991 मȂ जब इनकी सरकार 
थी, तब उसी सǄा क े दबाव मȂ इन्हȗने क्या-क्या पाप िकए थे, इितहास इसका गवाह है। वह भारत 
क े इि तहास  का सबसे काला िदन था, जो हममȂ से िकसी भी नागिरक को नहीं भूलना चािहए। 
महोदय, कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, एक सरकार इन्हȗने चन्दर्शेखर जी क े साथ चलाई, जैसी इनकी 
आदत है, चार महीने बाद उनको  दे िदया। इन्हȗने दूसरी सरकार नरिसÇहा राव जी की चलाई 
और जैसी इनकी आदत है, बेचारे नरिसÇहा राव मरे, उनकी शवयातर्ा िनकली, कांगर्ेस क े 
कायार्लय क े गेट पर आधे घंटे तक खुली खड़ी रही, लेिकन इन लोगȗ ने अपने Ģधान मंतर्ी की 
लाश को अपने कायार्लय क े अंदर नहीं घुसने िदया। ...(Ëय
वधान)...इितहास क े पन्ने गवाह हȅ, 
जवाब देना पड़ेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
उपसभापित महोदय, यह IMF अथार्त International Monetary Fund  की  िरपोिटȊग है। 
IMF ने भारत की मजबूत आिर्थक उपलिÅध की Ģशंसा की है। Asia Pacific क े िनदेशक Ǜी क ृÍषा 
Ǜीिनवासन ने कहा िक भारत क े macro fundamentals बहुत अच्छे हȅ, देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा बहुत 
अच्छा परफॉमर् कर रही है, 6.08 Ģितशत की िवक ास दर बहुत अच्छी है। आप ध्यान से सुिनएगा - 
महंगाई पर िनयंतर्ण हो रहा है - यह भारत सरकार नहीं कह रही है, बिÊक वह संÎथा कह रही है, 
िजसके  दबाव मȂ आकर आपने भारत को िगरवी रख िदया था । महोदय, मȅ उस िवषय पर आने 
वाला हूं।  
महोदय, महंगाई पर िनयंतर्ण हो रहा है, अपने इस टारगेट क े भीतर भारत को Îवयं को 
और लाना होगा। मेरा अगला शÅद यह है िक 2023, यानी िपछले वषर्, िवǄ मंतर्ी जी बैठी थीं और 
2023 की दूसरी छम
ाही मȂ हुई आिर्थक वृिǉ ने सबको आÌचयर्चिकत कर िदया। भारत की मजबूत 
घरेलू मांग आिर्थक गित को बढ़ा रही है। उन्हȗने कहा िक भारत क े िवकास क े अनुपात को बदलना 
होगा। उन्हȗने अĢैल मȂ भारत की िव
कास दर 6.05 Ģितशत से बढ़कर 6.08 Ģितशत की थी। ये 
जीडीपी को चुनौती देने बैठे हȅ, सात साल रहे हȅ, इसी जीडीपी को बनाते रहे हȅ और इसी पर 
भाषण देते रहे हȅ। आईएमएफ ने कहा िक हम दोबारा भारत क े अनुमान को बदल रहे हȅ और भारत 
की  िवकास दर को 6.08 Ģितशत क े बढ़ाकर सेव कर रहे हȅ।  
उपसभापित महोदय, उन्हȗने िसफर् भारत का ही िवकास नहीं बताया, बिÊक उन्हȗने पूरी 
दुिनया क े िवकास का खाका खींच िदया। अमरीका की िवकास दर 2. 07 परस Ȃट, जमर्नी की 
िवकास दर 0.02 परसȂट, ģांस की िवकास दर 0.07 परसȂट। इटली की िवकास दर 0.7 Ģितशत, 
Îपेन की िवकास दर 1.9 Ģितशत, यूक े की िवकास दर 0.5 Ģितशत, जापान की िवकास दर 0.9 
Ģितशत, रूस  की िवकास दर 3.2 Ģितशत, Ĥाज ील की िवकास दर 2.2 Ģितशत, मेिक्सको की 
िवकास दर 2.4 Ģितशत, साउथ अģीका की िवकास दर 0.9 Ģितशत और हम गवर् क े साथ कह 
सकते हȅ िक भारत की िवकास दर को आईएमएफ की संÎथा ने सात Ģितशत का आंकड़ा िदया है। 
यह आईएमएफ कौन है? Ģमोद जी, 1991 मȂ आप ही की सरकार थी। आपके  पास ती न हÄते का 
फोरन िरज़वर् नहीं था, आपके  पास तीन हÄते का पैसा नहीं था। मूडीज़ ने आपको डाउनगर्ेड कर 
िदया था। आईएमएफ ने आपको लोन देने से मना कर िदया था। वÊडर् बȅक ने आपका पैसा रोक 
िलया था। आप
के  पास पूरी की पूरी ËयवÎथा फ े ल कर रही थी। आप मजबूर हुए। आपने दो बार - 
एक जुलाई और तीन जुलाई को भारत की मुदर्ा का उन्मूलन िकया और सब स े घिटया काम िकया। 
सोना िगरवी रखा तो रखा, लेिकन अगर आपका िदल साफ था, तो खुलेआम सामने से रखते। 
चोरी से सोना िगरवी रखने काम दुिनया की िकसी सरकार ने िकया, तो भारत सरकार ने िकया 
...(Ëयवधान)... भारत का 67 टन सोना इन लोगȗ ने दो बार - एक बार 20 टन सोना, एक बार 
43 टन सोना... ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे कोई असर नहीं पड़ता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... बैठ जाइए, 
नहीं तो िचÊ
लाते रह जाओगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़ आप चेयर को एडर्ेस किरए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: एक बार 20 टन सोना और एक बार 43 टन  सोना इन लोगȗ ने 
िगरवी रखा। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... रात क े अंधेरे मȂ रखा। ...(Ëयवधान)... उपसभापित महोदय, हुआ 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
83

 
 
क्या? एक बहुत नामी पतर्कार हȅ - शंकर अÈयर। वे बेचारे िकसी काम से एयरपोटर् गए थे। उन्हȗने 
देखा िक एक टर्क का पिहया फट गया है। जब पिहया फट गया, तो वे देखने पहुंचे और पता चला 
िक उसके  अंदर सोना भरा हुआ है, तब जाकर दूसरे िदन खबर छपी िक भारत ने अपने 142 
करोड़ नागिरक, िजनकी चचार् कर रहे हȅ, उनसे िछपाकर भारत का सोना िगरवी रख िदया। हम 
गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक हमारे पास एक Ģधान मंतर्ी हȅ। यह चुनाव की गहमागहमी मȂ िछप 
गया। 31 मई, 2024 को हमारे मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इस देश ने अपना सौ िक
लो टन सोना भारत मȂ 
वापस मंगवाया है और उसे भारत क े Îवणर् भंडार मȂ रखा गया है।  
उपसभापित महोदय, ये आिर्थक आंकड़ȗ की चचार् कर रहे थे, तो मȅ भी इन्हȂ क ु छ आंकड़े 
बता देना चाहता हूँ। इन्हȗने ऋण क े ऊपर चचार् की। आज भारत का ऋण जीडीपी का 85 परस Ȃट 
है, यह मȅ मानता हूँ। पूरी दुिनया क े क्या आंकड़े हȅ? अमेिरका का ऋण जीडीपी का 129 परसȂट है। 
जापान का ऋण जीडीपी का 264 परसȂट है। इटली का ऋण 142 परसȂट ऑफ जीडीपी है। ģांस 
का ऋण 112 परस Ȃट ऑफ जीडीपी है। यूक े का ऋण 97 पर सȂट ऑफ जीडीपी है। भारत का ऋण 
85 परसȂट ऑफ जीडीपी है। पूरी दुिनया मȂ भारत ने िवकास भी सवार्िधक गित से िकया है और 
भारत की ऋण गर्Îतता भी पूरी दुिनया मȂ उसके  सकल घरेलू उत्पादन क े मुकाबले सबसे कम है। 
यह िवकास हमने तब िकया है, जब हम इस देश क े नागिरक
ȗ से सबसे कम टैक्स लेते हȅ। आप 
इनकम टैक्स की बात कर रहे हȅ! हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक भारत अके ला ऐसा देश है, 
पूरी दुिनया का अके ला देश है, जो पूरी दुिनया मȂ अपने नागिरकȗ से सबसे कम टैक्स लेने का काम 
करता है। िĤटेन अपने नागिरकȗ से 33 परसȂट टैक्स लेता है। नॉवȃ 31 परस Ȃट टैक्स लेता है। 
ऑÎटर्ेिलया 30 परसȂट टैक्स लेता है। िÎवट्ज़रलȅड साढ़े 27 परस Ȃट टैक्स लेता है। इजरायल 24
 
परसȂट टैक्स लेता है। यूरोिपयन यूिनयन 26 परसȂट टैक्स लेता है। जमर्नी 22 परसȂट टैक्स लेता है। 
Îवीडन 21 परसȂट टैक्स लेता है। अमेिरका साढ़े 16 परसȂट टैक्स लेता है और हमने पूरी दुिनया मȂ 
जो यह ऐितहािसक िवकास की गित पाई है, वह िसफर् और िसफर् 7.6 परसȂट टैक्स ऑफ जीडीपी 
क े आधार पर पाई है। उपसभापित महोदय ...( Ëयवधान)... सर, अभी रुिकए , बैिठए 
...(Ëयवधान)... ये आरबीआई की िरप
ोटर् ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल जी, आप चेयर को संबोिध त कीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी आरबीआई की अधूरी िरपोटर् पेश कर रहे थे 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपस मȂ बात मत कीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, चेयर को संबोिधत कीिजए।   
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: उपसभा
 पित महोदय, मȅ पूरी िरपोटर् पेश कर देता हूं।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 2011 मȂ भारत क े नागिरकȗ की जीडीपी की नेट वथर् 85.7 Ģितशत था। ये आकं ड़े 
हȅ, आपने क्वोट िकया है, तो आप पूरी तरह इन्हȂ पिढ़एगा।  माचर् 2014 मȂ तीन साल क े कायर्काल 
मȂ यह 85.7 परसȂट से घटकर 78.5 Ģितशत आ गया। तीन सा
ल क े अंदर आपने देश क े नागिरकȗ 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
की 7 Ģितशत पूंजी  ली।  हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक माचर् 2014 मȂ मोदी जी सरकार आई 
और हमारा नेट फ ैिमली वथर् 78.5 Ģितशत से बढ़कर 97.2 परसȂट हो गया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You will get opportunity to speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: अथार्Þ क ु ल िमलाकर हमने 19 परसȂट अितिरƪ पूंजी इस देश क े 
नागिरकȗ की जेब मȂ पहुंचा
ने का काम िकया है। 2014 मȂ इनकी सरकार थी, तो Ģित Ëयिƪ आय 86 
हज़ार थी। ये आपके  आंकड़े हȅ, महाशय! 50 परसȂट नागिरक, 70 परस Ȃट नागिरक - जब उस 
समय आंकड़े देते थे, तो आपको 50 परस Ȃट और 70 परस Ȃट नहीं िदखता था! उस समय आपको 
औसत िदखता था! आपने 86 हज़ार की  आय देकर  छोड़ा था। आज भारत की Ģित Ëयिƪ आय   
िकतनी है - कहां आपने 86 हज़ार पर छोड़ा था और हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक आज भारत 
का आम नागिरक 2 लाख 12 हज़ार  रुपया कमाता है। 2 लाख 12 हज़ार  रुपय े इस देश की Ģित 
Ëयिƪ आय है। ये गरीबȗ की बात कर रहे थे, ये बात कर रहे थे देश की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा की, ये 
बात कर रहे थे िक लोगȗ क े पास धन नहीं है िक वे बेचारे खचर् कर सकȂ । उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ 
आपके  संज्ञान मȂ िसफर् एक आंकड़ा लाना चाहता हूं।  आरबी
आई, वे माने या न माने, सरकार तो वे 
उसी से चलाते थे। आरबीआई, देश क े पास िकतना पैसा है, िक तना पैसा खचर् करती है, नागिरकȗ 
को अपने िवकास का अंदाजा क ै से लगता है, उनके  पास पैसा नहीं है, तो वे काम क ै से करते हȅ, 
इसीिलए वे हाई-ģीक्वȂसी इंिडके टसर् िनकालते हȅ। ये वहीं आंकड़Ȃ हȅ, िजनके  बारे मȂ अपनी सरकार 
मȂ रहते समय ये भाषण देते रहते हȗगे। मȅ इन्हȂ इनके  चेहरे पर िदखा देता हूं। गर्ामीण एिरया मȂ ट ू 
Ëहीलसर् की सेल 21.3 परसȂट बढ़ गई । क्या यह िबना पैसे क े बढ़ गई? थर्ी Ëहीलसर् की सेल 12.3 
Ģितशत बढ़ गई। ...(Ëयवधान)...  क्या आपने जेब मȂ पैसा डाला था? टर्ैक्टर की सेल 3.7 परसȂट 
बढ़ गई।  आदमी क े पास पैसा नहीं था, तो क्या वह टर्ैक्टर खरीद रहा था?  टोल कलेक्श न िपछले 
एक साल मȂ 37.5 परसȂट बढ़ा है। क्या ये गािड़यां िबना पैटर्ोल, िबना डीज़ल क े चलती हȅ? अभी 
आपने िकतना िकलोमीटर बताया - 5000 in one month. My G o d !  H e  o n l y  c a n  m o v e ,  
nobody else can move. Nobody else can move. He only can move. मȅ तो आÌचयर्चिकत 
हूं! ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: उपसभापित महोदय, टोल कलैक्शन 37 परसȂट बढ़ गया।  पैसȂजर 
Ëहीकल की सेल 4.9 Ģि
तशत बढ़ गई। डोमेिÎटक एयर टर्ैिफक 6.6 Ģितशत बढ़ गया। डोमेिÎटक 
एयर कारगो टर्ैिफक 6.7 Ģितशत बढ़ गया। इंटरनेशनल पैसȂजसर् 13.2 Ģितशत बढ़ गए। रेलवे ģ े ट 
टर्ैिफक 10.1 Ģितशत बढ़ गया। होटल ऑक्यूपȂसी 60 परसȂट बढ़ गई। सीमȂट का Ģो डक्शन 10.6 
परसȂट बढ़ गया। मकान नहीं बन रहे थे, िनमार्ण नहीं हो रहा था, तो सीमȂट का क्या कर रहे थे, 
महाराज! कभी तो इन आंकड़ȗ को देखने की कोिशश किरए। Îटील का Ģोडक्शन 19.1 Ģितशत 
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
85

 
 
बढ़ गया। ऑटोमोबाइल की सेल 18.2 Ģितशत बढ़ गई।  कॉमिर्शयल Ëहीकल की सेल 3.5 परसȂट 
बढ़ गई।  ...(Ëयवधान)... जीएसटी का ई-वे िबल 16.3 परसȂट बढ़ गया। जीएसटी का कलेक्शन 
11.4 परसȂट बढ़ गया। उपसभापित महोदय, नागिरकȗ क े पास पैसा नहीं था - मकान की खरीद 
नागिरकȗ क े बीच मȂ 33 परसȂट बढ़ गई। 33 परसȂट अिधक लोगȗ ने इस साल अितिरƪ मकान 
खरीदे हȅ।  ये कहते हȅ िक देश मȂ पैसा नहीं है!  आप देख नहीं पाते, देखना नहीं चाहते, jaundiced 
eye है। ...(Ëयवधान)... ठीक है, ठीक है। 
 उपसभापित महोदय, इनका एक दूसरा आिर्थक आँकड़ा आता है, वह जानना बहुत 
जरूरी है। उस आँकड़े को कहते हȅ - Purchasing Managers' Index. इस बार इन्हȗने अपने 
भाषण मȂ नहीं कहा, लेिकन िपछली बार जब ये खड़े हुए थे, तो Purchasing Managers' Index 
की बात कर रहे थे। इनका जवाब देते समय मȅने कहा था िक आप  बोल रहे हȅ, आपने गलत 
आँकड़े ĢÎतुत िकए हȅ। आज मȅ सही आँकड़ा ĢÎतुत कर देता हूँ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया बोलते वƪ संसदीय शÅद का इÎतेमाल करȂ। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: हाँ, इसको असत्य कह लीिजए, ĥम कह लीिजए, जो चाहे कह 
लीिजए।    
 उपसभापित महोदय, मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग क्षेतर् मȂ Purchasing Managers' Index देख लीिजए।  
Purchasing Managers' Index का  मतलब होता है िक देश की िवकास गित...(Ëयवधान)... 
समझ लीिजए, नहीं तो िफर ये लोग उÊटा बोलȂगे। समझाना भी तो जरूरी  है न!  इसका मतलब 
होता है िक िवकास की धारा क ैसी है! 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: डा. अगर्वाल, आपके  पास एक िमनट समय है। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: अगर यह 50 से नीचे है, तो इसका मतलब देश का िवकास कम हो 
रहा है और अगर यह 50 से ऊपर है, तो इसका मतलब देश का िवकास बढ़ रहा है। माननीय नेता 
Ģितपक्ष, 24 घंटे तो आप बोलते हȅ, कभी हम लोगȗ को भी बोलने का मौका दे दीिजए।  
मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग मȂ Purchasing Managers' Index, ऑÎटर्ेिलया का मूÊय है 47.2; जापान का मूÊय 
है 50; अमेिरका का मूÊय है 51; चीन का मूÊय है 51; यूनाइटेड िंकग्डम का मूÊय है 50; दुिनया का 
औसत है 50 और  मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत का Purchasing Managers' Index 58.3 
Ģितशत है। यह िकस बात का Ǐोतक है!  
 उपसभापित महोदय, ...(समय की घंटी)... ऐसे ही सिर्वस क े क्षेतर् मȂ एक Managers' 
Index िनकाला जाता है। िपछले भाषण मȂ इन्हȗने उसको भी quote िकया।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका समय खत्म हुआ, अब आप जो भी बोलȂगे, उसका समय पाटीर् क े टाइम मȂ 
से जाएगा। 
                                                            
 Withdrawn by hon. Member. 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: उपसभापित जी, मेरे नेता यहाँ बैठे हȅ, वे मुझे िजतना समय दȂगे, मȅ 
बोल लूँगा और आदेश होते ही मȅ बैठ जाऊँ गा। उपसभापित महोदय, यह भाजपा का समय है। 
 महोदय, एक सिर्वस मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग इंडेक्स होता है। इस बार इन्हȗने नहीं बोला, क्यȗिक 
थोड़ा पढ़-िलख िलए हȗगे, जान गए हȗगे िक िपछली बार  बोल िदया था। मȅ उसका आँकड़ा बता 
देता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया संसदीय शÅद का ही इÎतेमाल करȂ। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: हाँ, उपसभापित महोदय,  शÅद हटा दीिजएगा। बोलने क े कर्म मȂ 
आ गया होगा, मȅ उसे वापस लेता हूँ। सिर्वस क्षेतर् मȂ रूस  का Purchasing Managers' Index 
47.6; जापान का 49.4; यानी सब 50 से कम; ऑÎटर्ेिलया का ... (Ëयवधान)... # 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़। Ëयिƪगत िटÃपणी िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगी। Ãलीज़, आप चेयर को देख 
कर बोलȂ। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: महोदय, ऑÎटर्ेिलया 51 परसȂट; चीन 51 परसȂट, यूनाइटेड 
िंकग्डम 52 परसȂट, यूएसए 53 परसȂट, जबिक उपसभापित महोदय, भारत क े सिर्वस क्षेतर् का 
PMI 60.5 Ģितशत है, जो पूरी दुिनया मȂ अके ला है।   
 महोदय, एक तीसरा आँकड़ा भी है, िजसके  बारे मȂ ये िपछली बार नहीं बोले थे- 
Composite Managers' Index. जापान 49.7, अब ये लोग सुन नहीं रहे हȅ। सुन सब रहे हȅ, 
लेिकन न सुनने का नाटक कर रहे हȅ। इन्हȗने कान इधर कर िलए हȅ और मुँह उधर कर िलए हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। डा. साहब, आप अपने समय से अिधक बोल रहे हȅ, आप पाटीर् का 
अिधक समय ले रहे हȅ। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: जापान 49.7; रूस  49.7; ऑÎटर्ेिलया 50 परसȂट, यूनाइटेड 
िंकग्डम 52 परसȂट; पूरी दुिनया का औसत 53 परसȂट और भारत का 60.9 Ģितशत का आँकड़ा है।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, क ु छ और बातȂ हȅ। ...( समय की घंटी)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: ऑलरेडी, आपकी पाटीर् ने जो समय िदया था, आप उससे अिधक बोल चुक े हȅ।  
Please conclude. 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: उपसभापित महोदय, एक दूसरा आिर्थक आँकड़ा िनकलता है, 
िजसे ये िनकाला करते थे। ये भी 7 साल िवǄ मंतर्ी रहे हȅ, हालाँिक ये ट ुकड़े-ट ुकड़े मȂ रहे हȅ।  
                                                            
 Withdrawn by hon. Member. 
# Not recorded. 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
87

 
 
हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी तो लगातार हȅ, एक continuity है। ये बेचारे आते थे, भगा िदए जाते थे। ये रह-रह 
कर रहते थे, इसिलए इनका Îथाियत्व नहीं आ पाता था। हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी का 7 साल का Îथाियत्व 
है।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, Professional Forecasters का  assessment िकया गया है। सारे 
क े सारे आँकड़े तैयार हȅ।  
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
उपसभापित महोदय, real GDP 6.8 per cent - IMF मानेगा, Standard and Poor मानेगा, 
भारत सरकार मानेगी, World Bank मानेगा, भारत क े लोग मानȂगे, लेिकन अगर नहीं मानȂगे, तो 
यही बेचारे नहीं मानȂगे। ...( Ëयवधान)... Private Final Consumption Expenditure, 6 per 
cent; Gross Fixed Capital Formation, 8.6 pe r cent; Gross Value Added, 6.6 per cent.  
महोदय, इनके  कायर्काल मȂ Current Account Deficit (CAD) 4.5 per cent था। कल हमारी 
िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने बजट ĢÎतुत िक
या।  हम गवर् क े साथ कह सकते हȅ िक हमारा CAD 4.5 Ģितशत 
से घट कर 0.7 Ģितशत पर आ गया है।  
  उपसभापित महोदय, ये लोग एक और आंकड़ा िनकलवाते हȅ। ये िवǄ मंतर्ी रहे हȅ। ये भूल 
गये हȗगे। इन को  याद करा देना जरूरी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, इनको याद करा देना जरूरी 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इनको अपने जमाने का सब याद रहता था। महोदय, actually जब ये लोग 
अंगर्ेजी मȂ बोलते हȅ, तो हम उǄर भारत क े लोग थोड़ा दब-दब से जाते हȅ। 
   
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: Ãलीज़, आप सÅजेक्ट पर बोिलए।  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: ये ज़रा िहन्दी मȂ सुन लȂ और िहन्दी मȂ जवाब दे दȂगे। RBI ने 
calculation िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय: वे भोजपुरी मȂ भी जवाब दे सकते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: हम तो उनके  दे ली, मनोज झा क े, उनके  त देवे क े पड़ी
।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: Current Situation Index - भारत का Current Situation Index, 
जो रोजगार क े आधार पर बनता है, आिर्थक पिरिÎथितयȗ क े आधार पर बनता है, मूÊय क े आधार 
पर बनता है, आय क े आधार पर बनता है और न
ागिरकȗ क े खचर् करने की क्षमता क े आधार पर 
बनता है, 100 क े मुकाबले इसका मूÊय 97.1 Ģितशत है। एक साल बाद भारत की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा 
क ैसी होगी, इन िवशेषज्ञȗ क े मन मȂ आज से आने वाले एक साल क े बाद भारत आिर्थक रूप  से 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
क ैसा मजबूत होगा, उसके  िलए वे लोग Future Expectation Index िनकालते हȅ। महोदय, 100 
क े Index मȂ भारत का मूÊय 124.7 Ģितशत है। ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 उपसभापित महोदय, ये गरीबी की बात कर रहे थे।   ये per capita income से गरीबी 
देखते हȅ। भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी ने तय िकया। वे गरीबी से उठे थे। उन्हȂ मालूम था िक अगर गरीबȗ 
की आय थोड़ी सी बढ़ा दी जाए, तो भी आिर्थक सुिवधाओं तक उनकी पहुँच नहीं होती, सामािजक 
सुिवधाओं तक उनकी पहुँच नहीं होती, शैक्षिणक सुिवधाओं तक उनकी पहुँच नहीं होती। उसकी 
जेब मȂ पैसा होता है, लेिकन िविभन्न सामािजक पूवार्गर्हȗ क े नाते इन सुिव
धाओं को वह खरीद नहीं 
पाता। इसिलए आपने गौर िकया होगा  िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने गरीबȗ क े अमीर बनने का 
इंतजा
र नहीं िकया, उनकी जेब मȂ पैसा आएगा, तब वे यह सुिवधा पाएँगे, इसका इंतजार नहीं 
िकया। उन्हȗने उनको 4 करोड़ मकान बनाकर दे िदए, िनःशुÊक दे िदए; घरȗ मȂ शौचाल य दे िदए, 
िनःशुÊक दे िदए; घरȗ मȂ िबजली दे दी, िनःशुÊक दे िदया; बीमारȗ का इलाज करा िदया, िनःशुÊक 
करा िदया; गैस दे िदया, िनःशुÊक दे िदया और िफर, आय को 86,000 से बढ़ा कर 2 लाख 12 
हजार कर िदया। ...(समय की घं टी)... महोदय, मȅ समाÃत कर रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ 
समाÃत कर रहा हूँ।  
 महोदय, ये नीित आयोग की आलोचना कर रहे थे। ये क्या करȂ? ये Ãलािंनग कमीशन 
चलाया करते थे। * हमारी सरकार आई, तो हमने तय िकया। हम federal cooperation मȂ िवÌवास 
करते हȅ। हम Ģधान मंतर्ी हȅ, तो हमारा मुख्य मंतर्ी भी अपने Ģदेश का सÇमािनत अिधकारी है। हम 
अपने अिधकािरयȗ को, हम अपने मुख्य मंितर्यȗ को और राजनैितक जनĢितिनिधयȗ को IAS और 
PCS क े अिधकािरयȗ क े सामने attendance लगाने क े िलए मजबूर नहीं करȂगे। Ãलािंनग कमीशन 
को समाÃत करके  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस देश क े हरेक मुख्य मंतर्ी क े सÇमान की रक्षा की 
है।  ...(सम
य की घं टी )... महोदय, नीित आयोग का एक Multi-dimensional Poverty Index 
है, जो यह बताता है िक िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ हमने 24 करोड़ 10 लाख लोगȗ को िसफर् गरीबी रेखा 
से ऊपर ही नहीं उठाया है, बिÊक जीवन की िजतनी जरूरत Ȃ होती हȅ -  आप लोग तो अमत्यर्  सेन 
क े बहुत बड़े भƪ हȅ, चूँिक वे भाजपा क े िवरोधी हȅ। आप लोग अमत्यर् सेन का गुण गाते हȅ। अमत्यर् 
सेन भी Multi-dimensio
nal Poverty Index को लेकर आए थे। आपने नहीं लागू िकया, क्यȗिक 
आपका चेहरा बेनकाब हो जाता। आपने नागि रकȗ  को सुिवधाएँ दी नहीं थीं, खाली फजीर् पर-
क ैिपटा, पर-क ैिपटा बताया करते थे, इसिलए आपने इस देश मȂ मÊटीडायमȂशनल पॉवटीर् इंडेक्स 
को कभी नहीं लागू िकया। भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी ने यह काम िकया, नागिरकȗ तक सुिवधा पहुँचाई। 
चुनाव चुनौती क े साथ उन्हȗने कहा िक जब तक एक-एक नागिरक क े चेहरे पर खुशी नहीं 
आएगी, गाँधी जी का वह सपना पूरा नहीं होगा िक जब तुम नीितयाँ बनाते हो, तो यह देखो िक 
तुÇहारी नीितयȗ से गरीबȗ क े आँसू साफ होते हȅ या नहीं।...(समय की घं टी)...  हम गवर् क े साथ 
कह सकते हȅ िक िपछले दस सालȗ मȂ हमने 24 करोड़, 10 लाख नागिरकȗ क े आँसू पȗछे।...(समय 
की घंटी)...  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ अभी बहुत क ु छ कहना चाहता था, लेिकन आपने रोका है, 
इसिलए मȅ रुक  रहा हूँ, मौका दीिजए, तो िफर अप
नी बातȂ रखूँगा, धन्यवाद।  
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
89

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल जी, आपने अपने िलए तय समय से िजतना 
अिधक समय िलया, वह समय आपकी पाटीर् से जाएगा। माननीय Ǜी जवाहर सरकार। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (West Bengal): Sir, I invite your kind attention to 
Rule 261. Rule 261 says, "If the Chairman is  of opinion that a word or words has or 
have been used in debate which is or are defamatory or  indecent or unparliamentary 
or undignified, he may in his discretion, or der that such word or words be expunged 
from the proceedings of the Council." 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It has already been done. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY: Sir, only one word, आदरणीय राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल 
जी जोश से बोल रहे थे, तो उस जोश मȂ यह लĽज आ गया - ' आप लो
 ग  रहे थे', This is 
unparliamentary, according to the Parliamentary publications book on 
Unparliamentary Expressions, 2021.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is right. ...(Interruptions)...  यह असंसदीय शÅद है, 
इसिलए वह िनकलेगा। आप यह सही कह रहे हȅ।  
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY: I am referring to a book. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are right. I have already indicated.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY: Sir, I am refe rring to a book which is a publication 
of the Parliament.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप सही हȅ। 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY: The name  of the book is Unparliamentary 
Expressions, 2021. उसको जरा आप देख लीिजए। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय जी,
 you are correct, I have already instructed 
about it. ...(Interruptions)... 
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
The next speaker is Shri Jawhar Sircar; you have fifteen minutes. 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal): Sir, I would like... please आप बैठȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: यह िसफर् दो शÅदȗ पर था, जो उन्हȗने कहा है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Sir, I would like to thank you first. I would like to thank the 
Chairperson of our party. I would like to th ank the National General Secretary and the 
Leader of the House for giving me an opport unity to state certain facts. Before that, I 
would like to make one comment to my hon. Friend. He has mentioned 'paisa' 
around 40 times in his speech. 'पैसा' डा. अगर्वाल नहीं जानȂगे, तो कौन जानȂगे? 
Secondly, he has made a lot of statements that are really defamatory in nature. 
I would say if he really believes, if he really believed in... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have to speak  on the subject, Mr. Jawhar Sircar. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी जवाहर सरकार: सर, इनकी बात छोिड़ए।...(Ëयव
 धान)... मुझे अपनी बात पर आने दीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have taken his name. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Sir, I would like to start by expressing my deep sorrow at the 
wasted opportunity of a Finance Minister who has been there for seven years. I came 
into the Budget process some 21 years ago and have drawn and helped execute 
budgets. I have not seen such a lacklust re budget, such an absolutely atrocious 
Budget. This is the Budget that is a fig leaf  for plutocracy and for a rule by the rich.  I 
will give just a few examples.  Hon. Finance Minster starts off by saying, ‘I let off gold, 
silver and platinum.’  This is a fact.  Sir, gold, silver and platinum is her priority!  When 
I talk of silver, the first thing that comes to my mind is a scandal in the GIFT City, in a 
particularly favoured State. There is a huge scandal about import of silver.  Then she 
says, ‘I let off cruise ships.’ सर, बजट मȂ लग्जरी कर्ूज िशÃस की भी कोई बात होती है! I gave 
up the Angel Tax. Angel Tax, Sir, is meant fo r high investment by high investors. This 
has nothing to do with the common man.  She said, ‘I removed the Angel Tax.’ तो 
हमारे िलए क्या Devil Tax है, बाकी क्या devil tax छोड़ा ? She has let off Angel Tax! Have 
you thought even once about small savings?  Sir, there is not a word about small 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
91

 
 
savings! Not a word about the common ma n. The tragedy of the hon. Finance 
Minister is that she does not understand the subject and rains from a high hog!   
She has, deliberately, avoided the names of all the important States that voted 
against her. Sir, West Bengal has not been  uttered once; Punjab never, Tamil Nadu 
never; Kerala never and none of the Stat es she uttered! We do not exist in her 
scheme of things. That is what I am trying to say.   
 She starts up saying, ‘We are the fifth largest GDP.’ हम यह कब तक सुनȂगे? You 
are supposed to have made it US$5 trillion by  this year. You have not; so, you have  
to the nation. You have not been able to manage even US$4 trillion. As Mr. 
Chidambaram said, it is all jugglery of deflat ion. If you have come to close to US$4 
trillion, it is not thanks to you, it has ha ppened because of the people of India. As 
people say, it happened in spite of the Go vernment; it didn’t happen because of the 
Government.   
 Sir, her Economic Survey suddenly brings  out one word of truth. I am quoting 
that sentence. It says, ‘The Indian corporate sector profits are at a fifteen year high.’  I 
don’t grudge it. I grudge the 75 year low through which the poor are going. That is 
what my grudge is.   
The Budget talks of youth, women, poor and farmer. But, what did it do in 
reality? In reality, it has turned itself into a user-friendly political weapon. It has 
created monopolies and oligopolies. It has created crony raj and we can go on giving 
a number of examples, whether it be airp ort, port, coal, solar and even foreign 
contract dalal.  
Now, I come back to taxation structure. It was always around 40 per cent of 
the personal income tax of poor people an d 60 per cent was from corporate tax. Sir, 
60 per cent used to be the corporate tax. Today, they are equal. Now we are totally 
unequal. Personal income tax has gone up from 40 per cent to 55-60 per cent and 
corporate tax has come down/slashed down deliberately, to give them some benefit 
which they never returned to the nati on through any inve stment. The present 
calculation is that the present hon. Finance Minister and the hon. Prime Minister have 
let off Rs. 8 lakh crores – it is a lot of money - it is th e Budget of five States put 
together – of corporate tax, along with a write-off of Rs. 16 lakh crores of banks’ bad 
debt!  Sir, out of Rs. 16 lakh crores of banks’ bad debt (NPAs), she has given me, in 
writing, that around Rs. 9 lakh crores ar e on account of Modi, – sorry, Nirav Modi – 
on account of Jatin Shah, and on account of other big frauds and corporate losses. 
                                                            
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Sir, with a cumulation of such a plut ocratic, such an absolutely openly 
capitalist Budget, we have landed into an  inequality that is one-and-a-half times 
worse than colonial times. ...(Interruptions)... अगर इनके  पास इतना पैसा है, तो क ैिपटल 
फॉमȃशन तो करȂ। But, the Private Capital Formation has declined steadily during this 
regime.  Let them contest it. Those officers , who give them such papers, should also 
give them such truths, once in a while तािक अपने ख्वाब तो तोड़Ȃ। This has happened 
consistently.   
This Budget is the most anti-federal Budg et that we have seen in the last 20 
years. The most deliberate anti-federal Bu dget. I will come to my State. They 
declared an economic war on Bengal becaus e Bengal refuses to subscribe to their 
principle of hatered. We do not believe in the ha tered against minorities. आप हमȂ मार 
डािलए, िफर भी हम minority क े िखलाफ कोई काम नहीं करȂगे। We do not believe in 
casteism.  So, don’t come and introduce the poison of casteism in my State and say, 
“हमȂ वोट दो - हमȂ वोट दो।“  And, f or that, we have to pay a penalty that is higher than 
many other States.  We have been st opped funding on MNREGA, Aawas Yojana, 
Gram Sadak Yojana, and even on health to the poorest. And, ou r dues are Rs. 1.72 
lakh crores. ...(Interruptions)...  1.72 lakh crores! We are doing Awaas Yojana on 
our own.  We are doing MNREGA on our own.  नरेगा पर इतना गुÎसा क्यȗ है, उसका नाम 
बदल दीिजए न, महात्मा गांधी जी का नाम हटा कर िकसी और का नाम रख दीिजए, पर पैसा तो 
दीिजए। उसको नरेन्दर् मोदी रूरल  डेवलपमȂट बना इए। West Bengal is the only State that has 
been deprived for three years. You have declared a special war of vendetta. The 
Prime Minister and the Financ e Minister have declared a special war against us.  
Please, please look at history. In this sub-continent, if you take out a particular region 
or a particular State and declare a war of vi ndictiveness, you are playing with fire. You 
are playing with fire, with the emotions  of the people. You have even stopped 
kerosene quota. यह क्या हो रहा है? You talk of giving e-vouc hers for financial support 
to one lakh students. Bengal has alread y given it to eleven lakh students. आप हमȂ क्या 
िसखाएंगे? On Finance Commission grants, as you know, there are no conditions 
possible. But, you have started putting condit ions here too. You have started it and it 
is anti-federal because you ar e you increasing your tax budget through surcharges 
and additional duties. And, you are not di stributing this. You are keeping this to 
reward those States that prop you up.  
You have talked of inflation. The one that matters the most is the food inflation, 
which is over nine per cent – 9.2 to 9.5 pe r cent. Vegetable market is on fire. But, 
you look only at the fire of the stock market.   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
93

 
 
 
Now, I come to the household consumpt ion expenditure. Your report will not 
show that 43 per cent Indians are skipping  a meal. Your national account 36 or 24 
shows that household incomes have crashed by rupees nine lakh crores in two years. 
I am repeating, crashed by nine lakh cr ore rupees in two y ears! The household 
savings have come down as a percenta ge of GDP. The household consumption 
expenditure has been shattered because of inflation.   
We come to Budget. When you talk of so many things that you are giving, you 
are not mentioning that this is on borrowed money. Never before have we relied on 
rupees fourteen lakh crores  of borrowal. You are putting the nation into a debt.  
Remember, 67 years and 13 Prime Ministers borrowed 55.8 lakh crores of rupees.  
But, one Prime Minister alone has borrowed three times more. It is a fact; let them 
refute it. And, now you talk of increased budget, मȅ यह दे रहा हूं, वह दे रहा हूं। Our debt, 
as a part of the GDP, you say, is lower than that of the USA or Japan. उनके  पास क्षमता 
है। They have the capacity to repay. They do  not have such a huge burden of the poor 
to carry on.  So, do not compare incomparables.  
You have cut down even on subsidy. Yo u have cut down even on subsidy on 
every account. On unemployment, you are on complete denial mode. Unemployment 
has already burnt you. The gentleman wh o spoke before me, his State has come 
down to half, where his party is concerned.  When I talk, my State, my party has gone 
up by 20 per cent in my State. So, these are the results. Do not fool yourself.  
Unemployment will blow up on your face.  
The labour force reports are based on mythical things. You worked for one 
hour, it is taken as a week employment. Yo u worked for one month, it is taken as 
your annual employment. अपने आपसे असत्य बोलना बंद कीिजए और कभी-कभी सच का 
मुंह देिखए। Now, employment linked subsidy is a new
 step. Before I come to that, I will 
tell you that we demand a White Paper on PLI. On PLI, I feel there is something that 
we all need to look at because almost all of  it is going to one State. In that State, 
Micron industry charges Rs. 3.2 crores per jo b. This is a racket. You have to take a 
look into it. And, if the Government has the capacity, let it put up a white paper on 
who got PLI, where and for what purpose, in  which State, cornering of all industries 
into one State, just one State, favouring a couple of other States.   
On health, our Budget has slashed. We need three percent of the GDP, we are 
spending less than one. ( Time-bell rings.) सर, यह क्या हो रहा है? इतनी बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ 
करते हȅ िक मȅ यह कर रहा हूं, वह कर रहा हूं। On health alone, we have crashed. On 
education, we have crashed. From our si x per cent of GDP target, we are nowhere 
near three percent.  
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
This is a Budget meant for the rich, only for the rich and it is a completely anti-
federal, anti-poor Budget and needs to be junked out. I completely believe that this is 
a motivated one that is meant against the poor man, against the citizens. Look at 
small savings, look at the over-centralisation of the NEET, look at the over-
centralisation at every level and you know  what I mean. With these words, Sir, I 
strongly condemn the Budget and the points  that I have raised, I hope, the hon. 
Finance Minister replies in a soft, decent manner with logical facts, not in  anger.  
Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Now, Shri N.R. Elango. You have 12 minutes. 
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I thank you for this 
opportunity. My response on this Budget is  going to be only political, not on any 
finance, economy or data becau se the Budget itself is political, not on any finance or 
economy. The Tamil Nadu had so many de mands. We were expecting so many 
things. We were hopeful of something from the Government but we got nothing. That 
is because the BJP got nothing from Tamil Na du. Sir, I have read in the newspapers, 
the hon. Prime Minister spoke to the Press saying and I quote: “Now it is the 
responsibility of all elected representatives and of all political parties who have fought 
for their respective parties, th at now for the next five years, we have to fight for the 
country and strive for it.”  Unfortunately, this was not brought to the knowledge of the 
hon. Finance Minister. This Budget, in my op inion, is not for the country but it is to 
appease very few. This Budget is not for the stability of the country but for the stability 
of this Government. I want to refer to only two portions of the Budget speech. The 
first line says, ‘the people of India have reposed their faith in the Government and 
elected it for the third term.’ With great respect  to the Finance Minister, I say, it is not 
correct. Only two persons have reposed faith on you; only two persons. And, you say 
that ‘you are grateful for their support.’ Th is is correct because you are grateful to 
those two who are supporting you, and nobody else.  
 Sir, the fault in the Budget is that it has great amount of regional disparities.  
Purvodaya Project is covering Bihar, Jhar khand, West Bengal, Odisha and Andhra 
Pradesh. The height of the tragedy is that  you have included Andhra Pradesh in the 
Eastern region. Maybe, because the rising Sun is shining well in the South, you 
thought, Andhra Pradesh is in the East. We don’t envy these States. They are our 
brothers. But we strongly condemn the step-motherly attitude of the Union. Our 
leader, great arignar Anna said, ‘North flourishes and South deteriorates'.  Because 
of the well-planned governanc e of our leader, Dr. Kalaignar, and Mr. Muthuvel 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
95

 
 
Karunanidhi Stalin, Tamil Nadu is performing  as one of the best States in terms of 
every parameter.  But we are punished fo r our best performance. Our contributions 
are not even returned by du e devolution of funds. No w, it may be not wholly 
unjustified if we say, North is flourishing because of the South.  
 Sir, Tamil Nadu is excelling in industry, in agriculture and in every other field.  
As per Niti Aayog’s report, 2023-24, in achieving the goals of low poverty, zero 
hunger, good health and well-being, quality education, gender equality, clean water 
and sanitation, clean energy and every ot her field, Tamil Nadu has excelled the 
average of India. Sir, the overall performance of Tamil Nadu was at 74 per cent in 
2020-21, and India was at 68 per cent. Tamil Nadu is at  78 per cent in 2023-24, and 
India is at 71 per cent. For the information of my learned friend, Dr. Radha Mohan Das 
Agrawal, I may have to say that these figures were only at 60 per cent and 67 per cent 
during the period 2020-21 and 2023-24 respectively for the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
 Sir, Tamil Nadu being one of the we ll developed States often receives less 
Central transfers compared to the less-developed States. Regarding the 
infrastructure projects, as far as the Metro Rail Phase-2 Project is concerned, the 
Metro Rail Project Phase-2, is on the 50:50 contribution of the State and the Centre. 
Though approval of every stage was granted, now the project is awaiting CCEA 
approval from the Central Cabinet. It is not being given. The State has commenced its 
work. We are having funds’ deficiency. I re quest the Union to consider this and to 
give the CCEA approval and to release necessary funds. The four new rail projects are 
imminent for the State and we request the Union to consider them and clear those 
projects expeditiously.  
 Sir, two disasters happened in Ta mil Nadu -- one, in Chennai and 
neighbouring districts; and number two, in the Southern-most part of the State. We 
requested about Rs. 37,907 crores as relief bu t the Centre, so far, released only Rs. 
276 crores, a meagre sum of Rs. 276 crores . The State is figh ting very much 
financially to take the relief measures. We  request the Union to immediately release 
Rs. 3,000 crores towards this disa ster management. Sir, as far as Samagra Siksha is 
concerned, Tamil Nadu has its own reservations about the New Education Policy.  
Though we have contributed our 40 per cen t towards this project, the Centre is not 
releasing its share of 60 per cent, which is around Rs. 2,152 crore. We have our own 
reservations about the New Education Policy,  but that is the State's autonomy. You 
cannot withhold funds because of that. On  the education front, we have been 
opposing NEET right from its introduction. Now it is very clear that the NEET 
examinations are not being conducted properly , that NEET is not really required and 
there is a great scam involved. Hence, we  would request that the Bill that was 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
unanimously passed in the State Legislature and pending assent by the President of 
India, should be cleared by the Union Government at the earliest. 
 Sir, it is important to note that the financial relationship between the Central 
Government and the State is dynamic an d can change based on various factors 
including economic conditions, political al ignments and policy priorities. We, being a 
significant economic contributor, urge the Un ion Government to give a fare share and 
greater autonomy to us in financial matters.  The attitude of the Union is leading to 
doubts about fiscal federalism. Moreover, we call for a broader reassessment of fiscal 
federalism in India. The current trend of centralization is unsustainable and detrimental 
to the diverse needs of our States.   
Sir, let us remember that India's stre ngth lies in its diversity. Our federal 
structure is not a weakness to be overcome, but strength to be harnessed. By 
empowering States, we empower India. Ne ver forget, by penalizing the people of 
Tamil Nadu for not voting for you, you are derailing federalism and the nation as well. 
 Sir, to conclude, this Budget missed a great opportunity to strengthen our 
federal structure and to drive equitable growth across all regions.  We, in Tamil Nadu, 
stand ready to contribute our fair share but we also demand our fair due.  It is time for 
a new fiscal federalism that respects St ate autonomy, rewards performance and 
works towards the collective progress of our na tion. Let us work together to build an 
India where every State can thrive, where diversity is celebrated and where the spirit 
of cooperative federalism truly prevails. 
 Sir, you have forgotten Tamil Nadu, Tamil and Thirukkural because the 
elections are over. Since the Prime Minister and the hon. Finance Minister were fond 
of Thirukkural before the Elections, I would like to conclude by quoting Thirukkural.  
Recently, everybody talked about Sengol, the scepter. Somebody has misinformed 
them that the scepter is translated into Tamil as Sengol. That is not so. Scepter is 
only known as kol. If they actually read chapters 55 and 56 of the Thirukkural, they 
would find the words sengol and kodungol.  When you deliver a good government, it 
is called sengol. If you deliver a bad, worse or tyrannical government, it is called 
kodungol.  S i r ,  l e t  m e  q u o t e ,  w i t h  y o u r  p e r m i s s i o n ,  o n e  Thirukkural -- the English 
translation of which says: "the Government of a nation would get spoilt every day if 
the Government does not do justice every ot her day." In the matter of finance, in the 
matter of governance, in every walk of life, if the Government does not act in a just 
manner, the Government will be spoilt every day. 
 Sir, I want to bring one more thing to the attention of the Chair.  On page 2, 
paragraph 4 -- I would be finishing it, Sir -- there is a sentence.  It is mentioned in the 
interim Budget, on page 2, first line. It reads, "We need to focus on four major 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
97

 
 
castes, namely, poor, women, youth and fa rmers." These are not castes. These are 
the sections of people. I do not know how the Finance Ministry terms them as 
‘castes’ of this country. I conclude by saying that the Budget and the attitude of the 
Union Government show who you are. The people of India will decide whether you are 
having a Sengol or kodungol. According to us, your rule is a Kodungol. People will 
teach a proper lesson to you. Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Sanjeev Arora.  You have five minutes.    
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA (Punjab): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir, for giving me a 
chance to speak on the Budget , especially today. I would like to speak on health 
sector vis-a-vis this Budget. India is ranked at 158
th place out of 196 countries on 
Government health expenditure. The so urce of this information is the 134 th Report of 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on H ealth and Family Welfare. If we see 
globally, healthcare expenditure in most of the countries, on an average, is 8-12 per 
cent of the GDP, whereas we, in India, wher e it is needed the most, are still below 
two per cent. It goes up to 17 per cent  in the U.S.A. There could be some 
exceptions. I have taken most of the coun tries in the world where expenditure on 
health is 8-12 per cent. It was NDA Government’s target in 2017 that by 2025, the 
expenditure on health would be 2.5 per cent of the GDP, and it was also mentioned in 
the National Health Policy drafted by the NDA Government. But, here we stand in 
2024-25, and it is still less than 2 per cent.  
 Then, out-of-pocket expenditure, as per Government record or Government 
report, is around 50 per cent. This is as per the National Health Accounts Estimates, 
but this is far from truth for one reason that there is much of expenditure being 
incurred in the form of OPD charges, radiology, pathology and purchase of medicines 
which happens in cash, which is not reported, but the other part is reported fully.  So, 
there is a private report which states that if we take into account all these 
expenditures, the total out-of-pocket expenditure comes to 60 per cent, which is very 
high. The world average of ou t-of-pocket expenditure is 18  per cent.  In a State like 
Uttar Pradesh, which is bigger than many countries, the out-of-pocket expenditure -
- this is again as per a Government report -- is more than 70 per cent. So, in India, 
out-of-pocket expenditure is more than thre e times than the global average, which is 
pushing many people into poverty.   
 Now, coming to the allocation for heal th in Budget, in 2023-24, the Budget 
Estimate was Rs.86,175 crores, whereas the Revised Estimate was Rs.77,624 crores, 
which means, as it is, it is less than 2 pe r cent of the GDP and then the amount being 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
spent is even lesser than what  is being shown in the Budget. It is not like Rs.1,000 or 
Rs.500 crore less, but it is a gap of Rs.10,00 0 crores.  This time, the Budget Estimate 
for 2024-25 is Rs.87,656 crores which is only 1 per cent in crease in the total health 
expenditure from the last year’s Budget.  I mean, it is not even close to the inflation.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have used 80 per cent of your time already.   
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: Why Sir?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Only one minute is left.  
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: No, Sir, don’t say that. Sir, your clock runs fast.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are talking of those figures and you are losing your own track.  
Please conclude. 
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: I will be quick. I am th ankful to Shri Sanjay Singh. He gave 
me his turn. I do not want to take much time and I will be quick.   
Coming to the issue of Research and Development in the medical field, we 
need to spend a lot because some of the medicines, which are being imported, cost 
crores of rupees.  ...(Time-bell rings.)...  Forget about cancer medicines, there are 
many other medicines. Sir, under Prad han Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health 
Infrastructure Mission, the Budget Estimate of last year was Rs. 645 crores and only 
Rs. 200 crores were spent. Why is it that in the health sector, which is required the 
most, the amounts are not being spent? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Arora, you are already over time. 
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: I am conc luding, Sir. I have not fini shed all my points but I 
am concluding.  I will straightway come to the last point.   
 To take care of all the issues, which I mentioned and which I could not, the 
only way forward is to increase the Budget allocation for health sector and make 
healthcare affordable for all. To begin with, I would request the hon. Finance Minister 
to increase Budget allocation to 2.5 per cent as mentioned in 2017 Report of National 
Health Policy.   
 Sir, I would also like to request the hon. Health Minister, Nadda ji, to use his 
good offices and get the needful done for ailing health care sector. Thank you. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
99

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Sujeet Kumar. You have 25 minutes. 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha): Mr. Chairman, Sir, at the outset, I would like to 
convey a message from my Party President, Shri Naveen Patnaik, with regard to the 
Budget, and, I quote: "BJP had put Special Category Status in their manifesto as a 
promise to the people of Odisha.  However,  this promise has not been considered for 
Odisha whereas special packages allocating crores of rupees have been announced 
for Andhra Pradesh and Bihar. Along with th is, the demand of Odisha for revision of 
coal royalty, which has been pending fo r years with the Central Government, has 
been rejected, because of which the State will lose thousa nds of crores of revenue 
every year. During the election campaign, a lot of big promises were made to the 
people of Odisha in different  sectors, especially, agriculture, MSME and industry.  
There is no mention of any promise being fu lfilled in this Budget. This is a complete 
neglect of Odisha and its people. Today, th e most serious issue being faced by the 
common public is inflation or  price rise and unemploymen t. This Budget does not 
have any considerable intervention to addr ess these two major issues. I am happy to 
see that there is a focus on tourism in Odisha .  I hope, this is substantial and we shall 
await the details.  I would say that along with  people of Odisha, I feel disappointed at 
the continued neglect of Odisha while the State contributes so much to the country. 
 Sir, people across the country are feelin g disappointed with this Budget, and, 
particularly, the people of Odisha ar e feeling let down with this Budget 
pronouncement. Andhra Pradesh and Bihar have received huge Budget bonanza. Let 
me give you some examples.  An outlay of  Rs. 26,000 crore has been given to Bihar 
for road projects.  About Rs. 15,000 crores this fiscal -- and more in the coming years 
-- has been given for the development of capital city of Amravati.   
The Central Government has announced  that it will support loans from 
multilateral agencies for Bihar and Andhra Pradesh. The Minister has also announced 
a Backward Region Grant for three District s of Odisha. Lest I am misunderstood, I 
would like to clarify that we do not grudge  this Budget bonanza for Bihar and Andhra 
Pradesh.  In fact, we are happy for our br others and sisters of Andhra Pradesh and 
Bihar that they have got this budgeta ry support. But why has this step-motherly 
treatment given to Odisha? Why have we been neglected? Are we not part of 
'Purvodaya', which the hon. Prime Minister has been talking abou t? Why is this 
appeasement to allies at the cost of Stat es like Odisha, Jharkhand and others? Can 
we have a Viksit Bharat without having a Viksit Odisha and Viksit Jharkhand? 
Sir, a mention was made of the KBK region of Odisha.  I come from that part of 
Odisha, which is probably as  backward as the three Dist ricts for which special grant 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
has been announced in this Budget. Why is  there no special grant for the KBK?  
Don’t other States need loans and support from multilateral agencies? Will the Central 
Government support the other States also wh en they apply for loans from multilateral 
bodies?   
Sir, I shall be failing in my duty if I do  not share the concerns that I have from 
this Budget. Because this is the Council of States, it is my duty to also highlight the 
concerns and the neglect of Odisha in the Budget of 2024-25.  The first concern that I 
have is regarding R&D. As a nation, we spend less than 0.7 per cent of our GDP on 
R&D, which is abysmally low. In comparis on to this, China spends 2 per cent, the 
USA spends 3.06 per cent, South Korea sp ends 4.6 per cent and Israel spends 4.9 
per cent of its GDP on R&D. How can we become a Viksit Bharat without focussing 
on innovation and R&D? I am so disappointed that this Budget does not have 
adequate focus and priority for R&D.   
The second concern I have is with rega rd to education. When it comes to 
spending on education and health, I am remi nded of the French Literature Laureate, 
Andre Gide, who said, “Everything that needs to be sa id has already been said but 
since no one was listening, everything must be said again.”   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, (DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU) in the Chair.] 
 
In her Budget speech last year, the ho n. Finance Minister listed out seven 
priorities, which she called Saptarishis. I was very disappointed last year as well, 
Madam, that Education was not one of the Saptarishis. This year, she has articulated 
nine priorities, and again, Education is not one of the priorities in her list.  We all know 
that investment in Education is the foundation of a nation. Way back, in the 1960s, the 
Kothari Commission and now the New Educat ion Policy of 2020 have been talking of 
investing at least 6 per cent of our GDP on Education. We are nowhere close to that.  
We are, at best, spending 3 per cent of our GDP. If you add the State Budget, it will 
probably become 4 per cent of  the GDP. But it is nowher e near 6 per cent of the 
GDP, which has been recommended by th e Kothari Commission and also our New 
Education Policy. Madam, a small State like Odisha, last year, under the leadership of 
the then Chief Minister, Shri  Naveen Patnaik, allocated 13.2 per cent of the State’s 
GDP on Education, which shows the commitment of the BJD Government and 
conviction of the BJD party towards Education. Madam, let me quote a few lines from 
the New Education Policy itself. “ The aim must be for India to have an education 
system by 2040 that is second to none with equitable access to the highest quality 
education for all learners regardless of socio-economic background. ” Inadequate 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
101

 
 
allocation to education does not match with these lofty goals of the NEP. I am afraid 
that the journey to 2040, which the NEP talks about, has started with a fractured leg.  
Instead of galloping to 2040, we will probably limp to 2040.   
Again, the Government has grossly under -prioritized spending on food and 
nutrition, particularly for children. "PM POSHAN 2" and "Saksham Anganwadi" are 
two of the flagship schemes of the WCD Ministry of the Government of India. The 
Revised Estimates for the financial year 2023-24 was Rs. 21,523 crore for these two 
flagship schemes, which has been reduced to  Rs. 21,200 crore in this year’s Budget 
Estimates, a deduction of over  Rs. 300 crore from last year ’s allocation.  Will this not 
show up in poorer learning and education outcome? If you reduce the allocation for 
the Mid Day Meal Scheme fo r POSHAN, for Saksham Anganw adi, will that not reflect 
in poor learning outcome for our children?   
The third concern that I have is regardin g Defence. As a regional party, Biju 
Janata Dal, and our party president, Shri Naveen Patnaik, have always stood with 
successive Governments when it  comes to the nation’s secu rity, unity and integrity.  
We have always stood with the Government in Delhi when it comes to defending our 
borders, when it comes to the unity and in tegrity of our country. Madam, at 6.22 lakh 
crore which is roughly 75 billion US dollar,  the total allocation for Defence marks a 
marginal hike of 4.79 per cent from the BE of last year. According to the Stockholm-
based policy think tank called SIPRI, China spends over 300 billion dollars on defence 
every year. And this is not even the official number. Because the official numbers from 
China are unreliable. They are fudged. Uno fficial estimates clai m that China spends 
over 700 billion dollars on Defence. That is  the difference we are talking about. The 
number is 75 billion dollars for India whereas for China, it is over 300 billion dollars 
officially and unofficially it is 700 billion dollars. This accounts for less than two per 
cent of our GDP. Less than two per cent of the GDP is spent on Defence. Many 
Parliamentary Standing Committees on Defe nce have recommended that as a nation 
we should spend at least over three pe r cent of our GDP on Defence. We are 
extremely proud of our Armed Forces who are guarding our borders and giving us this 
safety net. Our Armed Forces have to be battle ready. They have to be constantly 
ready to meet any eventuality, particul arly when we have a very belligerent, 
aggressive and hostile nation called China in our Indo-Tibet border. This is why I urge 
the Finance Minister to ensure that adequa te funding is allocated to the Defence. I 
hope that they have done the math but I want to ensure that adequate funding is 
allocated to the Defence.   
 My fourth concern is with regard to sports. At Rs.3,442.32 crore, the budget 
for the sports Ministry has been marginally hiked by 45.36 crore from the previous 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
year. It is only a marginal increase of 45  crore. With this lousy focus on sports, no 
wonder we are not in the top 30 sporting co untries in the world. A country aspiring to 
be a five-trillion dollar economy spending le ss than half a billion dollar on sports is 
certainly not encouraging. We are talking of  becoming a five-trillion dollar economy in 
the next one or two years but we are spen ding less than half a billion dollars on 
sports. It would not be out of place to bring to the attention of this House how Odisha 
has emerged as the sports hub of the count ry. Under the leadership of our visionary 
former Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik, Odisha successfully hosted two Men's 
Hockey World Cups twice in a row. We built the world's largest hockey stadium, in 
terms of seating capacity, ca lled the Birsa Munda Hockey Stadium in Rourkela which 
has made the entire nation proud. Odisha is the first and the only State to sponsor 
both the men's hockey team and the women's hockey team of the country. 
 The fifth concern is with regard to unemployment. Unemployment, as everyone 
would agree, is a very urge nt and pressing issue facing the country. In fact, the 
Economic Survey, which came out a couple of days ago, has estimated that the 
Indian economy needs 78.5 lakh jobs ever y year on an average until 2030 in the non-
farm sector to cater to the rising workforce.  We need 78.5 lakh jobs every year in the 
non-farm sector to meet the rising dema nd of employment. Which sector creates 
jobs? It is the MSMEs that create jobs for the country. It is the MSMEs that create 
wealth for the country. But, unfortunately, we did not see adequate focus on MSMEs 
in this Budget. I will give you some examples, Madam. I am happy that MUDRA Loan 
ceiling has been hiked from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 lakh. But talk to any rural 
entrepreneur and talk to any woman entrep reneur in the country, you will come to 
know how difficult it is to access a MUDRA lo an. They will tell you horror stories. It is 
so difficult to access MUDRA loan. So this hike in ceiling from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 
lakh unfortunately will not do much for rura l entrepreneurs and women entrepreneurs.  
We recommend that the Government should  give preference to local MSMEs in 
Government contracts and tenders up to Rs.20 crore. That will boost the local 
economy and the local ecosystem.  We urge the Government of India to hike the GST 
waiver for companies, which is Rs.20 lakh now, to Rs.2 crore. MSMEs need relief 
from the compliance burden th at they face. I am so gl ad that the hon. Finance 
Minister spoke about Jan Vishwas Bill 2.0.  I request her and the Government to 
expedite such a Bill which will ensure that our MSMEs are not burdened with 
compliances.  
 Madam, I would like to make a mention of gig workers. Today, we have about 
15 million gig workers in the country. Some estimates say that by 2030, we will have 
90 million, that is, nine crore gig workers in the country. We were expecting that in the 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
103

 
 
Budget Speech, hon. Finance Minister will announce a platform for gig workers, a 
fund for gig workers, where gig workers ca n register themselves. Today, we do not 
know because companies are not mandated to register gig workers. Companies like 
Zomato, Ola, Uber, etc. are not mandated to register gig workers. So, we do not 
know whether gig workers are employed or not. I sincerely had hoped that the hon. 
Finance Minister would have announced a fund and a platform where gig workers 
could have been registered.  If numbers are to be believed, today, less than nine lakh 
gig workers are registered whereas we ha ve about 1.5 crore which will increase to 
about nine crore by 2030. The reason I speak about gig workers is because they not 
only help generate employment but the best part is that they bridge the gap in terms 
of gender unemployment. Because of the flexible working hours, more women are 
able to join as gig workers. And if we focu s on such a database or on a fund for gig 
workers, then I think we can empower more women to enter our workforce.  
 Madam, the sixth concern I have is with regard to internship and CSR issue. In 
the Budget Speech, the hon. Finance Minister called for Top 500 Corporations to bear 
10 per cent of the internship cost from CSR kitty. This is neither desirable nor is it 
acceptable from a legal point of view because  internship is something which benefits 
the company directly or indirectly. To allow a company to adjust that amount against 
CSR fund is not ethical. It is not desira ble because less money will be available from 
CSR kitty to be spent on social sector, char itable activities, etc.  So, if you allow a 
company, which will benefit from internship, to adjust that CSR money, then less 
money will be available for othe r activities, which is not desi rable. Again, from a legal 
point of view, I think, there is an ambiguity in the legal regime. I would read the 
General Statutory Rules, 2021. It says, 'The  CSR projects or programmes or activities 
that benefit the employees of a company and their families shall not be considered as 
CSR activities in accordance with Section 1 35 of the Companies Act." I am reading 
from the General Statutory Rules of 2021.  Section 135 of the Companies Act is very 
clear that anything that be nefits the employees of th e company or their family 
members cannot be considered as CSR. So, I do not know how this budgetary 
pronouncement will be on the right side of  the law. Rather, what the Government 
could have done is to mandate that the companies contribute from their actual salary 
expenditure and could have paid the interns.   
 Madam, the seventh concern that I have is  with regard to tourism. Now, all of 
us know that tourism is a growth engine of the economy; tourism creates jobs; it 
brings in foreign exchange; it has multiplie r effect. Some studies have estimated that 
it contributes about 2.8 per cent to our GDP directly and close to nine per cent to our 
GDP indirectly. About four crore jobs are generated because of tourism industry 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
which is roughly eight per cent of the total employment of the country. I am also 
heartened to note that the hon. Finance Mi nister spoke of Odis ha. She spoke of the 
abundant natural beauty; she sp oke of the rich cultural legacy in Odisha, majestic 
temple architecture, classical dance, musi c, pristine beaches, wildlife, etc. So, I 
would really thank her on beha lf of the people of Odisha for that. But similar to the 
announcement for Bihar, we were expectin g a specific and structured package for 
development of tourism in Odisha which was not there in the Budget. I have a couple 
of suggestions.  
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
First is about the Bali Yatra. Madam, the erstwhile name of Odisha is Kalinga and 
Kalinga had a very rich and illu strious tradition of maritime history. The seafarers of 
Kalinga used to go as far as Java, Suma tra and Bali to trade and to commemorate 
this glorious tradition of maritime histo ry, every year, in the month of November, a 
festival called Bali Yatra is celebrated in th e historic city of Cuttack. Our leader, Shri 
Naveen Patnaik, has many a time urged the Centre to accord the status of national 
maritime heritage to Odisha's Bali Yatra fe stival. In fact, when hon. Prime Minister 
was in Bali for the G-20 Summit in 2022, he made a mention of Bali Yatra. So, that is 
the importance and significance of this festival but it has not been accorded the status 
of national maritime heritage festival. I urge the Government to consider this request.  
 Second is Dhanu Yatra. Dhanu Yatra is the world's largest open air theatre. It 
is a theatrical festival celebrating Ras Leela , celebrating the life of Lord Krishna and it 
is the world's largest open air theatre. It sh ould be recognized as a national festival 
and included in the list of fairs and festivals of India.   
 Odisha is the place that gave birth to  a new religious cult called the Mahima 
Dharma which talks of international well being. It was popularized by Sant Bhima Bhoi 
with his immortal words 
*Witnessing the plethora of plights on earth how one could 
bear with; let the world get redeemed at my cost."  It means,"how could one witness 
and bear with the plethora of plights of fellow human beings? Let the world get 
redeemed at my cost." Madam, these immo rtal words are inscribed on the walls of 
the United Nations in different  languages. So, the place of  birth of Sant Bhima Bhoi 
should also be developed.   
India is the origin of Buddhism. We all know and we are proud of this fact that 
India is the motherland of Buddhism. Th ere are many Buddhist sites in India like 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
105

 
 
Lalitgiri, Udayagiri and Ratnagiri where you had Pushpagiri and Parimalgiri Universities 
as recorded by the Chinese Scholar Hiuen Tsang. Now, this could be developed to 
attract tourists from East Asia and South East Asia particularly. Also, a Central 
University for the study of Buddhism and Bu ddhist philosophy should be established 
in Odisha.   
Madam, my eighth concern is with re gards to fiscal federalism. A lot has 
already been said about it but I would just quickly repeat. The size of the divisible pool 
of taxes has been going down. The Fifteenth Finance Commission had recommended 
that 41 per cent of the divisi ble pool should be devolved to the States but the actual 
share received by the States has been decreasing. In F. Y. 2022-23, it was 35.1 per 
cent. In the R.E. of F.Y. 2023-24, it was 36 per cent. In this year's B.E., it is 35.5 per 
cent which is against the spirit of the federal structure of the Constitution.  
Madam, finally, I would come to the neglect of Odisha. My Party President Shri 
Naveen Patnaik has time and again raised these issues of negligence with the past 
and the present Central Government when  it comes to tele-density, national 
highways, coastal highways, railway, bankin g and cutting of funds for the scheduled 
areas and for KBK. We have been urging th at special consideration should be given 
to Odisha when it comes to the Disaster Response Fund. It is a known fact that 
almost every year now Odisha witnesses super cyclones or cyclones.  So, we request 
that the sharing pattern under the Disaster  Response Fund should be 90:10 at par 
with the Himalayan States against the 60:40 that is there today. Secondly, the 
Finance Commission has also recommended that a devolution of Rs.100 crores 
toward Odisha for drought prevention meas ures and Rs. 800 crores for strengthening 
the Early Warning System should be sanctioned.   
N u m b e r  t w o  d e m a n d  f r o m  O d i s h a  i s  t his. We have a 480 kilometres long 
coastline but today we have only three port s, a major port in Paradeep and two minor 
ports in Gopalpur and Dhamara. There is po ssibility of developing many other ports, 
particularly, in places like Astaranga, Subarnarekha and a riverine port in 
Mahakalpada. This would boost the economy  of the State hugely and also stimulate 
and create jobs.  
The third demand is with regard to the GST on Kendu leaves. Kendu leaf, 
under the Forest Right Act of 2006, can be co llected by the tribal population. It has 
been categorized as a Minor Forest Produc e (MFP). Sir, today 18 per cent GST is 
levied on Kendu  leaf which is putting a huge burden on the Kendu leaf pluckers, on 
the seasonal workers and on the binders who are largely tribals. Ten lakh tribal 
population is dependent on these Kendu leaf economy. We demand that this 18 per 
cent GST should be waived off on Kendu leaves and this demand has also been 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
raised many a times by our hon. Party Presid ent in different fora. He has also written 
to the Union Government many a times on this.   
Madam, the fourth demand is with regard  to revision of coal royalty. Odisha 
being a coal-bearing State is at the forefr ont of coal production in the country 
thereby, helping and assisting in the energy security for our nation. But, I am sorry to 
point out that the coal royalty rate has re mained struck at 14 per cent since May of 
2012. For the last 12 years, there has been no revision in the coal royalty despite the 
inflation and despite the changing econo mic circumstances. Many a time, Shri 
Naveen Patnaik has written to the Union of India and many a time, he has spoken to 
different Union Ministers for revision in the coal royalty structure but it has fallen into 
deaf ears. Hence, it is urgent ly essential that we need to revise and review this coal 
royalty structure.   
Madam, regarding banking facilities toda y, 65 per cent of Gr am Panchayats in 
Odisha do not have a banking facility. If I talk of the KB K region from where I come 
from, close to 75 per cent of  the Gram Panchayts (GPs) do not have banking facility. 
We need support there.   
Madam, regarding Railways, you will be shocked to know that the rail density 
in Odisha is 18 whereas the national rail  density is close to 22. Our neighbouring 
States have much better rail density. We are very happy for them. But, we also 
demand that railway networ k should be enhanced in Odisha. East Coast Railways 
generate Rs. 20,000 crore reve nue from Odisha but still our rail density is much lower 
and I come to the KBK area which is a cluster of eight districts, seven of which are 
part of the Aspirational Di strict Programme of NITI Aayog. These eight districts are 
largely tribal and largely LWE -affected. (Time-bell rings.) The rail density is less than 
ten in single digit.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU): Please wind up. Your 
time is over. 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Madam, I will wind up in one minute. So, I and my party 
demand that there should be massive expans ion of the rail network in Odisha and in 
the KBK region particularly. It is because connectivity is the lifeline of a nation and 
connectivity is the backbone of the economy.   
 Now, Madam, we have some specific demands with regard to Railways, 
Malkangiri to Bhadrachalam , Jeypore-Malkangiri, Jeyp ore-Nabrangpur, Theruvali-
Gunupur, Kantibanji to Jeypore, Bargarh to  Nuopada and Lanjigarh road to Phulbani 
are some of the railway projects that need immediate attention.   
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
107

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU): Kindly wind up. ( Time-
bell rings.) 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Madam, last point. I am winding up. There is an 
announcement of construction of a Loco  workshop in a place called Narla in 
Kalahandi District. We are clueless as to wh at is happening with that. There is no 
progress on that. So, that is the final request.  
 Madam, I conclude by saying that in the last two decades, Odisha has 
witnessed remarkable transformation, remarkable socio-economic transformation but 
we are still not getting our dues. (Time-bell rings.) 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU): Shri Sanjay Yadav. He is 
not present. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. He is not present. Now, Shri Milind Murli 
Deora; you have five minutes to speak. 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA (Maharashtra):  Madam, for the time, from the hon. 
Parliamentary Affairs Minister, from the BJ P's time, they have agreed to give me 
some time. Time is very flexible.  ...(Interruptions)... महोदया, आपने मुझे इस वषर् क े 
क Ȃदर्ीय बजट पर बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं। क्यȗिक 
समय कम है, इसिलए मȅ अपने भाषण क े माध्यम से सरकार को महत्वपूणर् सुझाव देना चाहूंगा, 
बहुत ही Ãवाइंटेड सजेशंस देना चाहूंगा।  During the Motion of Thanks Speech, all of us 
spoke on various issues whic h were very political in na ture. I w
ould like to be very 
specific on issues going beyond politics. I am giving some very valuable suggestions 
to the Finance Ministry on issues that conc ern everybody in this House. For one, in 
my opinion, I firmly believe that eve ry expenditure incentive subsidy of the 
Government of India should be directed towards one goal of achieving three very, 
very important objectives. The first objectiv e is to create as much employment as 
possible, to on shore jobs that were lo st to China and bring them to India. मȅ मानता हूं 
िक रोजगार ऐसा मुǈा है, िजस पर पूरे सदन मȂ आम सहमित या सवर्सÇमित होगी।  E verybody 
wants to ensure we get the youth of India employed as quickly as possible. The 
second strategic objective for India in my op inion is to rework our supply chains and, 
again, reduce our dependence on countries that can become hostile towards us. The 
third very crucial objective is, while achieving and solving the unemployment problem, 
and while reworking and bringing supply chains to India, simultaneously, greening our 
economy. People have spoken about, in the Budget as well and in the Economy 
Survey also, how supply chains are being brought back. Madam, world over, the 
western countries which for the last two or three decades, moved their manufacturing 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
to a country like China are now adopting what  is called the 'China Plus One' strategy. 
They are adding countries like India to their manufacturing mix. They are also 
adopting something called 'ABC' 'Anywhere But China'.  ...(Interruptions)...  
Madam, my limited point is, bringing manufacturing to India is very, very 
crucial. Yesterday in televi sion debates, even some Members of the Opposition 
praised PLIs. With regard to PLIs or Producti on Linked Incentives, statistics aside, if 
you look at one important example, a company like Apple which manufactures 
iPhones, today, 14 per cent of Apple's glob al production worth 14 Billion Dollars is 
happening in India; thanks to Production  Linked Incentives. Therefore, suggestion 
number one is, we must direct Production Link ed Incentives to industries that create 
the maximum amount of employment. I also congratulate this Government for various 
initiatives that have led to the increase of  women in the workforce. As a woman, you 
will also appreciate, from 23 per cent seve n years ago, today, the number of women 
in our workforce has gone up to 37 per cent. People spoke about competitive 
federalism.  I also believe this is very, very critical. The more is the competition 
between States, the more India will beco me competitive globally. Artificial 
Intelligence/data revolution is another area we  need to focus on. I believe if we use 
incentives in the right direction, we can create indigenous capabilities in Artificial 
Intelligence and we can also green our eco nomy. With regard to green transition--
Bhupender Yadavji is here--I would like to say that while India's goal is to become net 
zero by 2070, how do we use these incentives to benefit industries like offshore wind 
energy? Green data centres will be a game-c hanger. I am also glad that the Finance 
Minister spoke about investing in small mo dular reactors. Nuclear energy is an area 
we should all be open-minded about. Ev ery country in the world, from western 
countries to China, to green their economy, are increasingly now going nuclear. In 
fact, one eye-opening statistics is, by 2035 , China will double its share of nuclear 
power in electricity generation, and by 2060 , it will reach almost 20 per cent. A very 
good example of that is a country called Sweden. Thirty years ago, they began 
greening their economy. Everyone said, "You  would lose jobs".  In three decades, 
they have reduced their carbon emissions by 80 per cent and th ey have also grown 
their economy two-fold.  
Madam, I have a few quick suggestions . I come from Mumbai, which is the 
financial, commercial capital of this co untry. Today, increasingly, young people, 
s o m e  o f  w h o m  w h o  h a v e  n o  i d e a ,  h a v e  no investing experience, are increasingly 
investing in the F&O (Futures & Options)  segment of the Indian stock market.  
SEBI, which is the regulator, has made repeat ed warnings that nine out of ten trades 
will lose money. I believe a better way to incen tivize people to invest for the long term 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
109

 
 
and not to become day traders, is to reduce the Long-Term Capital Gains. One 
suggestion that I would give to this Government and to the hon. Finance Minister, 
LTCG or Long-Term Capital Ga ins have been increased from 10 to 12.5%. I would 
urge the Finance Minister to review that.   
An important point I would like to make again about Mumbai. मȅ सबसे पहले 
महाराÍटर् की ओर से गवर्नमȂट ऑफ इंिडया और खासकर क ैिबनेट कमेटी को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद 
देना चाहता हूं िक गवर्नमȂट ऑफ इंिडया ने  76 हजार करोड़ रुपय े की वधावन पोटर् को मंजूरी दी 
है। This will be an economic game chan ger for Maharashtra,
 for the Mumbai 
metropolitan region.  But, I would like to say that today GIFT City in Gujarat is growing 
well.  We are all very happy about it.  But I firmly believe that today India has the depth 
to have another international finance cen ter in a city like Mumbai. This is very 
important for us to understand that cities  like Mumbai and GIFT are not competing 
against Bengaluru or against Hyderabad or against Chennai. Our competition is Dubai 
to the West and Singapore to the East. On e last point very quickly. We talk about 
investments, we talk about statistics, we are talking about creat ing jobs. I want to 
give one very good example.  In the last few years, and I have seen this with my own 
eyes in the last few months, मȅ महाराÍटर् गवर्नमȂट क े मुख्य मंतर्ी और उप मुख्य मंतर्ी जी को 
बधाई देना चाहूंगा। मȅ Home Minister को बधाई देना चाहूंगा, Gadchiroli was a naxal hotbed. 
Today, because of the efforts of the Govern ment of India and the State Government, 
recently a bhumi puja
n was done for a 10,000 crores steel project, which will bring 
7,000 jobs to Gadchiroli.  It is very easy to  talk about development; it is very easy to 
talk about creating jobs, but how you actually  implement it, is very important. And, 
these are my limited suggestions. I was hoping to give more suggestions.  But, I hope 
the Finance Minister will take these sugge stions up.  One is LTCG, second is 
Mumbai, the third is again to use all ou r incentives, expenditures, subsidies to 
achieve three primary objectives - creatin g jobs, reworking our supply chains and 
greening our economy.  Thank you very much. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU):  Thank you very much. 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. BHAGWAT KARAD) in the Chair.] 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. BHAGWAT KARAD): First of all, I thank hon. Chairman 
and our House leaders for giving me this  opportunity. The next speaker is Mr. 
Birendra Prasad Baishya. You have five minutes to speak. 
 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Si r, I, on behalf of my party, Asom 
Gana Parishad and President of my party, Shri Atul Bora, rise here to welcome the 
Budget and to support the Budget proposed  by the hon. Finance Minister. I must 
compliment hon. Finance Minister for her pres entation of Budget continuously for the 
seventh term. This is the achievement of the Madam Finance Minister. Sir, we are 
getting very little time.  I hope BJP will give me some extra time.   
Sir, I would like to draw the attention to the few points of this Budget. Firstly, 
everyone who has assembled he re must admit that this Budget is for mothers and 
sisters of our country because this Budg et proposes three lakhs crores for the 
beneficiaries of women and girls of our co untry.  Secondly, success of any economic 
policy depends upon the three factors - ag riculture, service and manufacturing.  
Under the leadership of Shri Narendra Modi's Government, this Government equally 
give importance to manufacturing sector, agri cultural sector and servicing sector.  
So, we have continuously achieved seven per cent growth. This Budget is for the 
welfare of the farmers.  It is the farmer's  friendly Budget. This Budget has allocated 
Rs. 1.27 lakh crores for the farmers' welfar e and the agriculture sector of our country. 
Sir, this Budget is a job-oriented budget. Th is Budget is going to invest Rs. 2.78 lakh 
crores for the infrastructure development, for the road and tran sport development of 
our country. This Budget has proposed Rs. 2.55 lakh crores for the development of 
Railways. It means more money will be flow ing in the market and capital expenditure 
will increase. Capital expenditure increase  means new Railway Stations will come, 
new jobs for Railway porters will come, new routes will come up and that means job 
creation is also coming up in our country. This Budget has given equal importance to 
job creation in our country.  
Sir, one of the basic things that I have seen in this Budget is that this Budget 
has proposed to give Rs. 6000 per month to 1.5 crore youths to get the training for 
skill development. It will be helpful to redu ce the unemployment in our country. Sir, I 
would like to draw the attention of this  House to one more thing which is very 
important.  Many people have talked about federalism; yes, this Budget has given Rs. 
1.27 lakh crores as interest-free loans to th e State Government for their infrastructure 
development. This is the spirit of federalis m which is supported by the Narendra Modi 
Government. Sir, I am very happy that Madam Finance Minister announced in the 
House that this Government is going to help the flood-affected people of Assam. 
Madam Finance Minister in her Budget speech categorically said that they will help the 
flood situation in Assam. The per capita inco me of Assamese people has been higher 
than any part of the country before Independence. But, due to floods, our economy is 
going down. So, we want permanent solution  for floods. During the discussion on 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
111

Motion of Thanks on the President's A ddress also, I have spoken about this 
issue that we want long-term and short- term projects from the Government to 
resolve the flood situation.  
Sir, I know that long-term projects will take time. Recently, a steel plant is 
coming up in Assam. Thirty four districts of Assam are flood-affec ted, 34 districts of 
Assam today are under floods. Out of 34 di stricts, 7,279 villages of Assam are badly 
affected. The roads, the school and the colleges all are badly affected. So, this is the 
worst situation in Assam. But, I am very gratef ul to hon. Chief Minister of my State.  
(Time-bell rings.)  
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. BHAGWAT KARAD): Thirty seconds left, four-and-a half 
minutes of your time have been finished.  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, give some more time to the 
hon. Member. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: Sir, hon.  Chief Minister of my State, Shri 
Himanta Biswa Sarma, has physically visi ted each and every relie f camp not aerially, 
but physically. So, this is the spirit of th e State Government and State Government is 
taking all the possible measures to help the flood-affected people. I humbly request 
Government of India to look after the issu e and give us handsome money to help the 
poor and flood-affected people.  
Secondly, hon. Finance Minister categoric ally said in the House that flood is 
due to overseas issue. This flow of wate r is coming from China. So, a permanent 
solution is required. I request Government of  India to include External Affairs Ministry 
and take up the issue with the Government of China to help us, to protect us from the 
floods. Sir, I must compliment Shri Narend ra Modi because, for the first time, this 
Government is going to invest more th an Rs. 27,000 crores fo r semiconductor in 
Assam. This is the first time it is going to happen in Assam.  Sir, Rs. 27,000 crores are 
going to be invested.   
 I would like to say one more thing.  This is the Government, under the 
leadership of Shri Narendra Modi, invested Rs. 35,000 crore for petroleum sector 
development in Assam.  We are here for the development of Assam.   
 Sir, one of the major problems that Assa m is facing today is relating to Assam 
Tea. Sir, Assam Tea is known to eve rybody. To boost our economy and to earn 
foreign exchange, Assam Tea industry plays a very important role in our country. This 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

tea industry, today, is suffering with a lot of problems. We are getting challenge from 
Kenya and Sri Lanka. So, to boost and save the tea industry of Assam, the 
Government of India should give some special package. 
 I would like to say one more thing. Small-tree growers play a very important 
role in addressing unemployment issue. They  play a very important role. But, these 
small tea-growers, today, face serious prob lem. So, I would like to request, in the 
interest of unemployment situation in the country, because they are small tea-
growers who play a very important and sign ificant role not only in Assam’s economy 
but also provide self-employment, help  from the Government of India. The 
Government of Assam is maki ng some better arrangement. It has already done some 
better arrangement to resolve the issue.   
 Another issue is that the Government  of Assam is introducing mobile tea 
testing labs. Sir, small people cannot set up tea testing units. So, they are suffering a 
lot.  And, without testing, their tea is no t taken by big companies. So, I request the 
hon. Minister of Commerce and Industry give some money to permanently set up tea 
testing laboratories in the interest of sma ll tea-growers. I hope this Government will 
provide this benefit as it will help to resolve the problem. 
 With these words, I thank you very much again for giving me this opportunity to 
speak on the Budget. 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश (झारखंड): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे 
महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया। सबसे पहले मȅ अच्छा बजट, संतुिलत बज
 ट 
लाने क े िलए देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का और िवǄ मंतर्ी, िनमर्ला सीतारमण 
जी का िदल की गहराई से अिभनन्दन करना चाहता हूँ और उनको साधुवाद देना चाहता हूँ। यह 
बजट 144 करोड़ जनता की आकांक्षा का Ģतीक है। यह बजट अमृत काल मȂ समाज क े सभी वगș 
मȂ अमृत वषार् करने वाला बजट है। यह बजट िवकिसत भारत की नींव का पत्
थर सािबत होगा। यह 
िवकिसत भारत का रोडमैप है और यह बजट देश को आगे बढ़ाने वाला बजट सािबत होगा। यह 
बजट नेशन फÎटर् की भावनाओं से ओत-Ģोत बजट है। मȅ इस सदन मȂ Îवामी िववेकानन्
द जी को 
Îमरण करना चाहता हूँ। 125 वषर् पहले िमिशगन िवÌविवǏालय मȂ Îवामी िववेकानन्द जी ने कहा 
था िक यह सभी आपका है, लेिकन 21 वीं सदी भारत की होगी। यह सौभाग्य की बात है और 
ईÌवर
ीय ĢदǄ चीज़ है िक Îवामी िववेकानन्द का भी नाम नरेन्दर् था और नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का नाम 
भी नरेन्दर् है। इसिलए Îवामी िववेकानन्द ने भारत क े बारे मȂ संकÊप िलया था और उस संकÊप को 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िसिǉ तक पहुंचाने का काम िक
या है।  इसीिलए मȅ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का िदल की 
गहराई से अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूं।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ िजस पाटीर् का कायर्कतार् हूं, उस पाटीर् की देश को समृǉशाली 
बनाने की Ģितबǉता है। यह संकÊप कोई भ
ारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े कालखंड मȂ नहीं िलया गया है।  
जनसंघ क े 1954 क े अिधवेशन मȂ भारत को समृǉशा ली बनाने का ĢÎताव पािरत होता है। 1969 मȂ 
जनसंघ का जब अिधवेशन होता है, तो उसमȂ भारत को आिर्थक और सामािजक दृिÍटकोण से  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
113

 
 
मजबूत बनाने का संकÊप िलया गया। जब 1980 मȂ भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की Îथापना होती है, तो 
भारत को समृǉशाली, समथर् भारत, Îवािभमानी भारत और आत्मिनभर्र भारत बनाने का संकÊप 
भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े Îथापना काल मȂ िलया जाता है।  इसिलए भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ जब सरकारȂ रहती हȅ, तब वे भारत का मान, सÇमान और Îव
ािभमान बढ़ाने का काम करती हȅ।  
कोरोना कालखंड क े बाद से दुिनया की अथर्ËयवÎथा वाÎतव मȂ बद से बदतर हो गई है। ऐसी 
िवपरीत पिरिÎथित मȂ न क ेवल हमारे भारत ने िÎथित को संयम से संभाला, बिÊक आिर्थक गित को 
दशा और िद
शा देते हुए देश की उन्नित का मागर् ĢशÎत करने का कायर् सफलतापूवर्क िकया और 
इस काम को करने वाले दुिनया क े स वार्िधक  लोकिĢय नेता का नाम नरेन्दर् मोदी जी है।   
महोदय, आज देश की 144 करोड़ जनता का मान, सÇमान और Îवािभमान क ेवल भारत मȂ 
ही नहीं बढ़ा है, बिÊक दुिनया आज हर भारतीय को अच्छी नजर से देखने का काम करत ी  है।  यह 
है भारत का सामथ्यर् और इस सामथ्यर् को अगर िकसी ने पहचाना है, तो देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान 
मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने पहचाना है।  क ेवल देश ही नहीं, बिÊक दुिनया की कई संÎथाएं भारत की 
अथर्ËयवÎथा क े संदभर् मȂ जो िव
चार Ģकट करती हȅ, तो उससे देश की 144 करोड़ जनता का 
मÎतक ऊ ंचा हो जाता है। महोदय, मȅ क ु छ बातȗ को आपके  सामने रखना चाहता हूं। भारत मȂ िवÌव 
बȅक क े जो क Ȃदर्ीय डायरेक्टर हȅ - Auguste Tano Kouam é, उन्हȗने कहा िक भारतीय 
अथर्ËयवÎथा - भारी दबावȗ क े बावजूद भारत क े सेवा िनयार्त मȂ वृिǉ जारी है और चालू खाते का 
घाटा कम हो रहा है। इस
के  अलावा वÊडर् बȅक ने अपनी एक िरप ोट र् मȂ कहा है िक दिक्षण एिशया की 
क ु ल अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा सबसे बड़ी है। भारत की िवकास दर मȂ सबसे अहम 
सेवा क्षेतर् और औǏोिगक िवकास होगा।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इंटरनेशनल मॉिनटरी फ ं ड ने क्या कहा - राजक ोषीय  अनुशासन 
बनाए रखने क े िलए भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा की सराहना की जानी चािहए और क्या कहा - भारत 
वैिÌवक वृिǉ मȂ 17 Ģितशत का योगदान करेगा। भारत मȂ महंगाई लगातार कम हो रही है। भले ही 
उनको जानकारी नहीं हो, लेिकन दुिनया को मालूम है िक कांगर्ेस को छोड़कर, िवपिक्षयȗ को 
छोड़कर दुिनया मानती है िक दुिनया मȂ महंगाई बढ़ रही है और भारत मȂ महंगाई दर कम हो रही 
है। ...( Ëयवधान)... आ
ईएमएफ ने और क्या कहा? आईएमएफ ने दुिनया मȂ भारत की 
अथर्ËयवÎथा को Îटार परफॉमर्र की संज्ञा दी।  
िडिजटलीकरण और बुिनयादी ढाँचे जैसे Ģमुख क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ आिर्थक सुधारȗ क े कारण भारत 
की िवकास दर मजबूती से बनी हुई है। आईएमएफ का और भी कहना है िक भारत मȂ घरेलू माँग 
लगातार मजबूत बनी हुई है, नौजवान आबादी बढ़ रही है, जो उत्पादन बढ़ाने मȂ सहयोग देगी 
और भारत को आिर्थक िवकास करने से कोई रोक नहीं सकता है।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क ु छ योजनाएँ, जो बजट मȂ आई हȅ, उनका 
अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूँ।  मȅ झारखंड का िनवासी हूँ और मुझे गवर् है िक मȅ झारखंड का िनवासी 
हूँ। भारत सरकार ने झारखंड को आगे बढ़ाने मȂ कोई कसर नहीं छोड़ी है और उसके  तहत बजट मȂ 
जो 'पूवȘदय योजना' है, उस 'पूवȘदय योजना' क े िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का अिभनंदन करना चाहता 
हूँ।  इस योजना क े ǎारा झारखंड सिहत पूवीर् भारत क े िवकास को बढ़ावा िमलेगा, िजससे 
बुिनयादी ढाँचे, उǏोग तथा अन्य योजनाओं से िवकास की िकरणȂ तेज हȗगी और झारखंड ही 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
नहीं, बिÊक पिÌचमी बंगाल, िबहार, ओिडशा जैसे राज्य, जहाँ कांगर्ेस क े कालखंड मȂ िवकास की 
िकरणȂ पहुँच नहीं पाई थीं, वहाँ इस बजट क े माध्यम से िवकास की िकरणȂ धरातल तक पहुँचȂगी।   
 मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहता हूँ िक इस बजट मȂ संघीय ढाँचे क े बारे मȂ उÊलेख िकया 
गया है, राज्य क े आिर्थक िवकास मȂ संघीय सहायता का उÊलेख िकया गया है, राज्यȗ क े लेनदेन 
की Ģणाली को लचीला बनाया गया है।  मेरी सरकार की मान्यता है, क Ȃ दर् सरकार की मान्यता है, 
मोदी जी की सरकार की मान्यता है िक क Ȃ दर् और राज्य, दोनȗ एक दूसरे क े पूरक हȅ और दोनȗ क े 
संबंध अन्योन्याǛय होने चािहए।  िंकतु उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज मुझे बड़ी पीड़ा हुई। आज सुबह 
जब मȅ यहाँ पर आया, तो एक Ģकार से कांगर्ेस और िवपक्षी दलȗ की भूिमका देखने से हमारे जैसे 
लोगȗ की आत्मा को वाÎतव मȂ बहुत तकलीफ हुई। मȅ इस बात का उÊलेख करना चाहता हूँ िक 
इस बजट मȂ देश क े सभी राज्यȗ को आिर्थक सहायता देने का उÊलेख िकया गया है।  िबहार को 
अगर सड़कȗ क े िनमार्ण क े िलए क ु छ अलग से योजना दी गई है, तो िवपिक्षयȗ को भी खुशी होनी 
चािहए, लेिकन िजस Ģकार से कांगर्ेिसयȗ ने िबहार को आिर्थक सहायता देने पर सदन से 
वॉकआउट करने का काम िकया, उससे वाÎतव मȂ िबहार क े सभी िबहारी ही नहीं, बिÊक देश क े 
अंदर जो िबहार क े िनवासी हȅ, कांगर्ेस ने उनकी आत्मा पर Ģहार करने का काम िकया है।  
इसिलए िबहार क े िनवासी और िबहार क े वे लोग, जो दूसरे Ģदेश मȂ रहते हȅ, कांगर्ेस ने उनकी 
आत्मा पर जो Ģहार करने का काम िकया है, यह सबसे दुखद बात है। अगर िबहार को कोई 
अितिरƪ सहायता िमलती है, तो आपको परेशानी िकस बात की है!  आपके  कलेजे पर साँप क्यȗ 
लोटता है! और तो और, जब मȅ िबहार जाता हूँ, तो वहाँ पर आपके  दल क े लोग कहते हȅ, 
...(Ëयवधान)... आपके  दल क े लोग कहते हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)... आपके  दल क े लोग कहते हȅ, 
...(Ëयवधान)... कहते हȅ िक क Ȃदर् सरकार से क्या सहयोग िमला। जब क Ȃ दर् की सरकार सहयोग 
करती है, तो आपके  पसीने क्यȗ छू टते हȅ? ' पसीना' शÅद तो unparliamentary नहीं है।   
...(Ëयवधान)... साँप भी नहीं है। यह मुहावरा है। बहुत ही आपिǄजनक है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसी 
कारण से आज आप उस पक्ष मȂ हȅ और हम इस पक्ष मȂ हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 महोदय, इस बजट मȂ रोजगार क े संदभर् मȂ - वाÎतव मȂ यह पहली सरकार है, क ेन्दर् मȂ 
मोदी जी की सरकार, जो रोजगार देने क े िलए क ृतसंकÊप है। मेरे ख्याल से शायद यह पहली बार 
हुआ होगा िक रोजगार पाने वाला भी लाभाथीर् होगा और रोजगार देने वाला भी लाभाथीर् होगा। यह 
इस बजट का सबसे बड़ा खूबसूरत पहलू है। नौकरी मȂ Ģवेश करने वाले 50 लाख युवाओं को 1 
महीने का PFI -  क्या यह कोई छोटी बात है? 25,000 नौजवानȗ को जॉब की टर्ेिंनग दी जाएगी। 
क्या यह कोई छोटी बात है? अपने कालखंड मȂ तो आपने इसका िवचार नहीं िकया। पहली बार जो 
नौकरी पाएगा, उसको 1 महीने का वेतन -  मुझे तो 1974 क े आंदोलन को पढ़ने पर Îमरण आता है 
िक  उस वƪ देश की जनता ने आपके  िखलाफ बेरोजगारी क े सवाल पर, महंगाई क े सवाल पर, 
ĥÍटाचार क े सवाल पर आंदोलन िकया था और साथ-साथ तानाशाही क े िखलाफ आंदोलन िकया 
था।    
 इस बजट मȂ मोदी जी की सरकार ने आिर्थक िवकास क े संदभर् मȂ भी एक लÑय रखने का 
काम िकया है। इसमȂ आिर्थक िवकास को 10.5 Ģितशत तक बढ़ाने का लÑय रखा गया है। इस 
बजट क े अंदर िनवेश को बढ़ाने का संकÊप है और इस बजट मȂ िनवेश को बढ़ा कर, Ëयापार को 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
115

 
 
सुगम बनाकर, रोजगार का सृजन करने का संकÊप िलया गया है। यह एक ऐसी पहली सरकार 
है, जो मोदी जी की सरकार है।   
 महोदय, मȅ आपसे  िनवेदन करते हुए क ु छ तुलनात्मक िववरण भी रखना चाहता हूँ। आपके  
कालखंड मȂ जीडीपी का जो रेट था, जो िवकास दर थी, वह  6.7 परसȂट थी और आज जब 
एनडीए की सरकार है, तो यह 7.3 Ģितशत है। आपके  पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने इन्Äलेशन क े बारे मȂ 
खूब भाषण िदया। असत्य आंकड़े खड़ा करने का काम िकया। मȅ मुदर्ाÎफीित क े बारे मȂ उÊलेख 
करना चाहता हूँ। इंÄलेशन का जो रेट यूपीए क े कालखंड मȂ 10.1 Ģितशत था, आज एनडीए 
गठबंधन की सरकार मȂ, मोदी जी क े सरकार क े नेतृत्व मȂ इंÄलेशन का रेट 4.6 Ģितशत है। ये 
आंकड़े हमारे नहीं हȅ, ये आंकड़े आपके  भी नहीं हȅ, ये ÎटैिटिÎटकल आंकड़े हȅ।  आंकड़े सच बोलते 
हȅ और आपको इन आंकड़ȗ का सामना करना पड़ेगा। अगर आपके  समय क े इंģाÎटर्क्चर की बात 
की जाए, तो सड़कȗ क े िनमार्ण मȂ, आपके  समय मȂ Ģत्येक िदन 12 िकलोमीटर  सड़क बनाने का 
काम होता था, यह आपने िकया था और आज एनडीए क े सरकार मȂ, वतर्मान मȂ Ģत्येक िदन 28 
िकलोमीटर सड़क बनती है। यूपीए क े कालखंड मȂ आपने एलपीजी क े एक करोड़ कनेक्शंस का 
िवतरण िकया था और एनडीए की सरकार मȂ, मोदी जी की सरकार मȂ 13 करोड़ एलपीजी 
कनेक्शंस हमारी माताओं और बहनȗ क े घरȗ तक पहुंचाने का काम िकया गया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
हाँ, आप ठीक कह रही हȅ, उनके  घरȗ मȂ भी पहुंचा। ...(Ëयवधान)... अटल जी क े शासन क े बाद 
आप सǄा मȂ आए और आपको तो एक अच्छी िवरासत िमली थी।   
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 उस समय आपको एक अच्छी अथर्ËयवÎथा िवरासत क े रूप  मȂ िमली थी, लेिकन आपने 
2014 मȂ मोदी जी को एक ऐसी अथर्ËयवÎथा िव
रासत मȂ देने का काम िकया, िजसके  बारे मȂ बोलने 
मȂ भारत का हर Ëयिƪ शमर्सार होता है। आपने भारत को पूरी तरह से घोटालȗ का देश बनाने का 
काम िक
या। आपने जंगल, जमीन तथा आकाश से लेकर पाताल तक घोटालȗ का िरकॉडर् खड़ा 
करने का काम िकया। आपके  शासन काल मȂ पूरी तरह से financial anarchism था। बȅिंकग 
िसÎटम पूरी तरह से collapsed था और आज भारत का बȅिंकग िसÎटम पूरी दुिन या मȂ सबसे 
बेहतर है। आपने इसको िकस हाल मȂ छोड़ िदया था? आपके  मंतर्ी तथा आपके  लोग पूँजीपितयȗ 
को चुटके  देते थे और चुटकȗ क े सहारे आप लोगȗ ने बȅक को खा ली  करने का काम िकया, इसिलए 
आज आप पर से लोगȗ का िवÌवास उठ चुका है।   
 महोदय, यह बजट ज्ञान पर आधािरत है और गरीब, यूथ, अन्नदाता, नारी और मध्यम वगर् 
पर आधािरत है। यह बजट वाÎतव मȂ एक अनोखा बजट है और इस बजट मȂ मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग, 
इन्ģाÎटर्क्च
र और सिर्वस सेक्टर क े माध्यम से, सÎटेनेबल डेवलपमȂट, सÎटेनेबल गर्ोथ क े माध्यम 
से समाज क े सभी वगș का उत्थान करने का लÑय रखा गया है।...(समय की घंटी)...    
 सभापित महोदय, मुझे एक िमनट का और समय दीिजए।  मȅ मानता हूँ िक िजस Ģकार से 
भारत ने हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ एक युगांतक
ारी पिरवतर्न लाने का काम िकया है, उसी तरह से ÎवाÎथ्य 
सेवाओं को और बेहतर करने क े िलए क ेन्दर् की सरकार लगातार का म कर रही है, लेिकन मȅ आज 
इस सदन मȂ एक रोचक Ģसंग रखना चाहता हूँ। वह रोचक Ģसंग यह है िक मȅ झारखंड से आता हूँ 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
और वहाँ पर कोडरमा िजला है और उस िजला मȂ एक मिहला को 12 बार बच्चा होना िदखाया गया 
है।...(समय की घंटी)...  महोदय, सामािजक सुरक्षा अिभयान का क ैसा लूट-पाट होता है, मȅ उस 
संबंध मȂ झारखंड की एक Ģसंग का उÊलेख करके  अपनी बात खत्म करू ँगा।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Pl
ease, you are already over time. 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश: सर, मȅ अपनी बात खत्म कर रहा हूँ।  झारखंड मȂ 'जननी सुरक्षा योजना' का 
िकस Ģकार से लूट-पाट है, वह मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ।  वहाँ पर काँगर्ेस की सरकार है, झारखंड 
मुिƪ मोचार् की सरकार है, आरजेडी की सरकार है।  वहाँ पर एक मिहला को एक िदन मȂ 12 बार 
बच्चा पैदा होना िदखाया गया है।  इत
ना ही नहीं, बिÊक एक पुरुष को भी बच्चा पैदा होना िदखाया 
गया है। इस स े दुभार्ग्यपूणर् और क्या हो सकता है? यह इनकी सरकार, झारखंड की सरकार का 
क ृ त है। कमाल है, कई वैज्ञािनक आज इस खोज मȂ लगे हुए हȅ, लेिकन झारखंड की सरकार... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, you were conclu ding; you were concluding. Please 
conclude. Take half a minute. 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश: सर, मȅ आधा िमनट मȂ अप
 नी बात समाÃत करता हूँ।  मȅ मानता हूँ िक देश की 
आजादी क े बाद जब 1951 मȂ फÎटर् फाइव ईयर Ãलान बना था, उसी मȂ कहीं न कहीं खोट 
था।...(समय की घंटी)...  सर, इसी क े साथ मȅ अपनी बात समाÃत कर ता हूँ,  धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please. No, you are not rounding up. Hon. Members, after Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose concludes her address, we will be taking up all the Special Mentions.  
Shrimati Sagarika Ghose - 15 minutes. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I rise to speak on 
behalf of my Party, the All-India Trinamool  Congress, on the Union Budget presented 
by the hon. Finance Minister.   
Inequality, inequality, inequality - this is the fundamental crisis facing our 
country today. This inequality crisis has not been addressed by this Budget, nor has it 
been addressed by the previous 10 Budgets of this Government. The Government is 
constantly telling us that it is pushing us in to more and more growth, but it is pushing 
us into more and more inequality. This Government is pushing us into what I call "The 
Inequality Trap". The Paris-based World Inequality Lab has said, in its 2024 Report, 
that India’s ‘Billionaire Raj’ has replaced the ‘British Raj’.  India is more unequal now 
than what it was in 1920s, in the colonial period. Sir, I want to repeat that India in 2024 
is more unequal than what it was under th e colonial rule in the 1920s. That is the 
catastrophe of inequality facing us. That is why the Budget needs to be about the real 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
117

 
 
people, the real India, the real issues an d not about fantasy land, not about Disney 
land.   
Here are some facts about inequality. The top one per cent of India controls 40 
per cent of the country’s weal th. Real earnings of regular salaried and self-employed 
have declined or remained stagnant. The ho n. Finance Minister claimed that the GST 
has benefited the common man. But the truth is that 67 per cent of the GST is paid by 
the poorest 50 per cent of India. India is a country where 800 million people still 
depend on free food. The Budget needed to challenge, needed to address this 
inequality trap. It needed to tackle The Inequality Trap.  It has failed to do so.   
I wanted to present five examples of  the inequality trap . The first is The 
Inequality Trap with regard to the States . The second is The Inequality Trap with 
regard to the rural areas.  The third is Th e Inequality Trap with regard to jobs. The 
fourth is The Inequality Trap with regard to  wealth and income. An d, the fifth is The 
Inequality Trap with regard to health and education. Fi rst, I will speak regarding 
inequality trap on States. This is a Unio n Budget meant for 28 States and 8 Union 
Territories, but a specific focus on Andh ra Pradesh and Bihar shows that this 
Government is looking to appease its new-found allies.  Look at the allotments made 
for Andhra Pradesh. The allotments made for Bihar and the huge financial package for 
Andhra Pradesh.  We wish the people of Bihar and Andhra Pradesh the best, but can 
you discriminate against some States and make special provision only for two States 
simply because you have forged a coalition wi th these States at the Centre? I have to 
remind that this is the same Government that went back on its promise of special 
status for Andhra Pradesh and Bihar. Now, for political convenience, the Government 
is bestowing largesse on these States. ...(Interruptions)... This unequal allotment is 
against constitutional democracy. ...(Interruptions)...  It is constitutionally immoral.  
It is ethically repugnant.  It is economically ruinous. ...(Interruptions)...   This is not 
co-operative federalism.  This is discriminatory federalism.   
 The Finance Minister talked about Purvodaya, Look East, Act East. But what 
is the Government doing in the largest State of eastern India?  Bengal is under siege.  
Bengal is facing an economic blockade.  Bengal has not received NREGA funds since 
December 26, 2021. A massive am ount of over rupees one la kh crore is due from the 
Centre to Bengal. The Finance Minister ta lked about the PM Awas Yojana, but for 
Bengal, funds have been withheld under th e PM Awas Yojana for 11 lakh sanctioned 
homes. An amount of Rs.7,000 crore ha s been withheld from Bengal under the 
National Food Security Act simply because  the Centre wants certain pictures and 
logos on those centres. Why this economic si ege of Bengal?  It is not just about 
Bengal -- my friends from the DMK are here  -- it is about Tamil Nadu, it is about 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Karnataka, it is about Kerala.  My frie nds from the Shiv Se na (Uddhav Thackeray 
faction) are here. It is also about Mahara shtra. Every citizen, whether he is from 
Manipur, Maharashtra, Punjab or Kerala , has equal rights on the funds of the 
Government of India. Why is the federal spirit being compromised? I would like to 
make a suggestion here.  What is needed is  a time-bound transparent audit of all the 
Centrally-sponsored Schemes of the Centre. ...(Interruptions)... Will the 
Government give an assurance to this Hous e of a transparent time -bound audit of all 
Centrally-sponsored schemes across States?  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Samik Bhattacharya, please.   ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Sir, the second example of the inequality trap is...  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is this? ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Samik Bhattacharya.   
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Sir, the seco nd example of the inequality trap 
...(Interruptions)... The inequality trap in the rural areas...  ...(Interruptions)... Sir, 
when the Government is asked about le gal guarantee for the Minimum Support 
Price... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Samik Bhattacharya.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: The Government's economic managers say that it will 
cost 17 lakh crore of rupees.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second.  Hold on.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Sir, no viability concerns are made 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Samik Bhattacharya. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Samik 
Bhattacharya.  I urge the hon. Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to control the Member.   
This is not the way. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Member, please take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)... This is not the way. Why are you interrupting? 
...(Interruptions)...  I do not appreciate interruption. This will not happen. This will 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
119

 
 
not happen from either side.  Please go ahead.  She is making her point.  It is a well-
prepared speech.  We may agree, we may not agree.  Please go ahead. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: When the Go vernment is asked about the legal 
guarantee for the Minimum Support Pri ce, the Government's economic managers  
say, we can't do this; it will cost 17 lakh crores of rupees. But what about the fact that 
in 2019, the Government gave corporate Indi a tax relief of about one lakh crore of 
rupees per year. The Home Minister is urging  people to invest in the stock market but 
the poor labourer in Bengal is waiting for his NREGA wages. He does not get his 
NREGA wages. 
 No practical steps have been taken in th is Budget to make agriculture buoyant.  
Allocations to agriculture and allied sectors have been reduced to only 3.15 per cent 
of the total Budget.  Subsidies on fuel, f ood and fertilizers have been slashed. No 
permanent structure has been created for debt-relief for the farmers.  When farmers 
agitated for the Minimum Support Price, th e Government refused to have a dialogue 
with them. Mr. Chairman, Sir, do you know th at just this year alone, 1,200 farmers in 
Maharashtra have committed suicide and have lost their lives.  Why does the Finance 
Minister not recognize this reality? Today, in spite of the Jal Jeevan Mission hype, 
22.5 per cent of the rural households only ha ve access to piped water within their plot 
and yards throughout the year. 
 Sir, the third example of The Inequality Trap is jobs and unemployment. It has 
taken ten years for the Government to wa ke up to the reality of unemployment. Amrit 
Kaal and Viksit Bharat cannot happen without rojgar. In this speech, the hon. Finance 
Minister mentioned 'employment' 23 times.  In the Budget for the year 2023-24, she 
had mentioned 'employment' just three time s. At last, she has mentioned the word 
'employment'.  This is what a rebuff from the voter can do.  Since the 2020 lockdown, 
millions have lost jobs but the Government is in a ' sab changa hai'  mindset. The 
internship and skilling programme is si mply not good enough. It is way too 
inadequate. It does not address the scal e of the problem. A Centrally-sponsored 
scheme for providing paid internship o pportunities in 500 top companies or some 
rupees as benefit to first time employees is  pure advertising and tokenism.  It is not 
going to solve this mammoth problem of unemployment.    
 Sir, 42 per cent of graduates under th e age of 25 can't find a job. The youth 
make up 80 per cent of India's unemploye d. This year, as the hon. Member, Mr. 
Chidambaram also said, 47 lakh candidate s applied for 60,000 constable jobs and 
27,000 candidates applied for 600 jobs in Ai r India. There has not been no massive 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
push on education to make sure that mone y is pumped into education, without which 
lakhs of Indians will remain unemployed.   
Sir, hatred, religious hatred is bad for the economy. Religious hatred cannot 
produce growth. Recently, orders were give n to deny livelihood to people on the 
basis of food habits.   
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
The Supreme Court has struck it down, but India can only provide jobs when we build 
social harmony. Joblessness is very hi gh among the disadvantaged communities, 
among dalits, among Muslims. In under priv ileged groups, jo blessness is 
skyrocketing. There is nothing in this Budg et that provides an  assurance that the 
Government of India is standing by India’ s most disadvantaged citizens. This brings 
me to my fourth inequality trap, inequality of wealth and income. The Government 
talks of competition, but we only have olig archy. We have a booming airline industry 
but only two operators of note; over a billion mobile subscribers but only three 
telecom companies. Sir, the rich have la vish celebrations, the rich have lavish 
weddings, lasting days.  But only 50 per cent  Indians can afford three square meals.  
We are at 142 out of 197 in per capita income. The biggest catastrophe of this 
Government has been the systematic destru ction of the MSME sector. According to 
the Government’s own data, more than 35,000 MSMEs have closed down since the 
Covid pandemic.  How does the Government intend to address the income gap when 
those who are the most vulnerable to changing economic tides are the least 
protected?  What protection is there for th e MSMEs in this Budget? None! There has 
been no change or relief on the 45-day paym ent rule which is hurting MSMEs, as it is 
leading to cancellation of orders. Other th an a sketchy sentence on rationalizing GST 
rates, no specific measure has been outlined  in this Budget for the revival of the 
MSMEs. What stops the Government from cushioning MSMEs the way it is 
cushioning India’s top corporates?  Income will not rise until the unorganized sector is 
given the greatest, the top, foremost priority .  Prioritize the unorganized sector now.  
Do it now.   
To add to the woes of the ordinary ci tizens, the Budget has abolished the 
benefit of indexation, which now means a huge tax burden on all assets acquired 
before 2001. The burdens of real people  have only increased . Wage earners and 
salaried taxpayers have been given little re lief. Three words are not mentioned in this 
Budget – Railways, minimum support price for farmers and MGNREGA. Why has the 
Finance Minister not mentioned these three words fundamental to the real people of 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
121

 
 
India -- MGNREGA, Railways and minimum supp ort price? I propose, as a solution, 
a dignity index.  Let the Government creat e a dignity index to measure how many are 
living a life of dignity and aim to create an economy where the maximum number can 
live a life of dignity.   
Sir, the fifth Inequality Trap is of health and education, stagnating or declining 
allocations to health and education. Heal th at one per cent an d education hovering 
around two per cent of the GDP. In this  Budget, health and education allocations 
have only gone down.  Sir, a shocking stat istics for you! The UNICEF has said that 
India is the second largest country with ze ro vaccinated children.  In 2023, 1.6 million 
children did not receive any vaccine at all.  …(Interruptions)…  A UNICEF Report says 
India is the second largest country of zero vaccinated ch ildren. On education, the 
state of education report says that 25 per cent of 14 to 18 year olds cannot read class 
2 texts. An eighteen year old cannot read a class 2 text.  That is the reality of 
education. The Budget shows no awareness of this demographic disaster that is 
threatening to take over our demographic dividend. Sir, Amartya Sen has said that 
economic development cannot be sustaine d without an educated and healthy 
workforce.  A Budget is much more than just numbers. A Budget should reflect the 
ideals of this august House. This august House reflects the ideals of the constitution 
of dignity and equality of all. ( Time-bell rings.)  In Bengal, we are respecting dignity, 
but the Government is not. The Government has  t o  w a k e  u p  f r o m  t h i s  b u b b l e  a n d  
smell the coffee, or rather the chai, but without sugar because Indians cannot afford 
sugar. Sir, we were wanting a Budget for the people.  We have got a Budget for the 
privileged.  (Time-bell rings.)  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: This Budget, the Budget of 2024, remains trapped in 
the inequality trap.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Special Mentions. Shri H.D. Devegowda. Concern over 
natural calamities in Karnataka, its neig hbouring States and other parts of our 
country.  Shri H.D. Devegowda.   
 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

Concern over natural calamities in Karnataka, its neighbouring States and other parts 
of the country 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka): Mr. Chairman, Sir, with your kind permission, 
I would like to mention about the natural calamity that occurred not only in Karnataka 
but also in other parts of the country.   
 In this particular incident, nine people died in Shirur village in Ankola Taluk in 
Karnataka last week.  When this incident took place -- my Congress friends are there 
-- no Government Minister went to this place.  When people died, nobody went there 
and there was traffic jam. I was watchi ng the proceedings of the House since 
morning. Sir, I don't want to raise the issue of politics.  Politics is a different matter.  
Tomorrow, I will speak on how coalition Gove rnments functioned in the past. I draw 
the attention of the House, since you are all el ders, only to this issue. Sir, I requested 
you that tomorrow I will speak on the Budget.  Because today I wanted to raise this 
issue. My friends are sitting here. Today, in  the morning, one issue was raised with 
your kind permission.  Somebody raised a po int of order.  Your good self has said, 'I 
will give the ruling tomorrow'. I know why you have permitted and with what 
background, and for the ruling which you are goi ng to give tomorrow, we are waiting.  
When the hill collapsed, nine people died.  It blocked the entire highway. Nobody 
from the State Government we nt there for six days. The Heavy Industries and Steel 
Minister of the Union Government went there.   After his visit, the Military was sent by 
the Union Government. Then the Indian Navy, Fire Brigade, SDRF, NDRF and all 
these organisations were sent there after the Union Minister visited that part.  Sorry!  
My friends are there. I am not blaming th em. You are equally interested.  Kharge ji is 
not here. No State Government Minister went to that part. ...(Interruptions)...   Only 
the Union Minister went there with all th ese organisations and sent them there to 
remove the dead bodies after the sixth day. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka) : Sir, he is making a political speech here. 
...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: The Chief Minister of Karnataka, after six days, went there. 
...(Interruptions)... See the fun! This is how Karnataka is functioning. 
...(Interruptions)...   I am not blaming you.  I am sorry. ...(Interruptions)...  I would 
like to request the hon. Members. You are all senior leaders. You must ask your 
leader, Khargeji. ...(Interruptions)...  I t  i s  n o t  f o r  m e .  ...(Interruptions)... This is 
how the Government is functioning.  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
123

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, we will hear you tomorrow on Budget.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: Now, my  friends, I would like to tell you very frankly that it 
is not politics. ...(Interruptions)... When people died, what was the State 
Government doing? ...(Interruptions)...  What is the State Government doing? 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, we will hear you tomorrow. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी (कनार्टक): वही तो बोल रहे हȅ। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: I thank the Union Government for sending all the NDRF, 
Indian Navy, fire brigade, etc. ...(Interruptions)...   I thank the Union Government for 
taking necessary steps for the people who were suffering and to have the dead 
bodies removed. ...(Interruptions)...   Today evening, it ha s been allowed after ten 
days.  This is the position. ...(Interruptions)...  Through hon. Chairman, Sir, I would 
like to bring this to the notice of the hon. House.  I am grateful to you for having 
allowed me to speak. Thank you very much. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha) associated himself 
with the Special Mention raised by th e hon. Member, Shri H.D. Devegowda. 
...(Interruptions)…  
I will allow you. ...(Interruptions)... First, everyone has to take seat. 
...(Interruptions)...   Please take your seats. I will call you.  Mr. Tiruchi Siva wants to 
raise a point of order.  Please raise it.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, Special Mention means that we have to give it 
in writing well before and it is vetted and ap proved by the Secretariat.  No word other 
than what is there in the admitted Special Me ntion should be read or spoken but he is 
giving a speech. All those things should be expunged other than what has been in the 
Special Mention.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सभापित जी, इस पर एक Îपेिसिफक Ģोिव
 ज़न है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You read the provision. Mr. Pramod Tiwari, you raise your point of 
order and read the provision which you are invoking.  
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी:  ठीक है।  
 सभापित जी, मȅ िसफर् यह कह रहा हूं िक मȅने जो बुक मȂ पढ़ा है, वही बता रहा हूं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You will have to read.  ...(Interruptions)...  Pramodji, you will have 
to. ...(Interruptions)...   Okay. He is raising a point of order. ...(Interruptions)...  
Mr. Saket, please sit down. ...(Interruptions)...   Are you raising a point of order?  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, actually, I would like to associate myself 
with Mr. Tiruchi Siva. Provisions and proced ures are equal to all the Members. What 
is so special about the former Prime Minist er? When the question of Special Mention 
comes, it is equally applicable to all the Members and we all follow that.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is your point of order?  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: Sir, I am just associating myself with Mr. Tiruchi Siva.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: So, it is very  simple. You are supporting Mr. Tiruchi Siva, a senior 
Member of the House. So, this is not a poin t of order. This can be summarily decided 
right now. ...(Interruptions)...  No.  Mr. Randeep, you will have to avail the 
opportunity in your own right.  You are getting a support. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJE
WALA (Rajasthan): Sir, you said that you will give me 
a chance. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No. …(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: With your kind permission, Sir, 
..…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes; one minute.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (WEST BENGAL):  Sir, point of order.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  He is raising first.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
125

 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Sir, we all respect the office of the former 
Prime Minister..…(Interruptions)…     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  Mr. Randeep, you are raising a point of order.   
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Absolutely, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Raise the point of order.  
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Yes, Sir.  Sir, my point of order… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Number one, specify th e rule and give the situation.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, you know the rule, you know the situation.  
…(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Sir, with  your kind permission, we all respect 
the office of the former Prime Minister.  …(Interruptions)…  In this case, he has been 
elected with the support of the Congress Party.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This is an allegation. …(Interruptions)… Don’t make.. 
…(Interruptions)…    No, Mr. Surjewala.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA:  
  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on record unless you 
raise a point of order. …(Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on record.  …(Interruptions)…  
Mr. Surjewala, you will have to raise the point of order.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA:  
   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Nothing will go on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on 
record.  …(Interruptions)…  Yes, Mr. Pramod Tiwari.  …(Interruptions)…  He is on his 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
legs.  …(Interruptions)… Sit down.  …(Interruptions)… Sit down, I am here.  
…(Interruptions)…  Yes.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, Rule 180A.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, it is Rule 180A.  …(Interruptions)…  Please take the book.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The book is with me, Mr. Tiwari.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, please read Rule 180. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, Rule 180. 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: "कोई सूचना गर्ाǩ हो सके , इसके  िलए उसमȂ िनÇनिलिखत शतȄ पूरी की 
जाएंगी, अथार्Þ : 
 
(i) इसके  साथ िवशेष उÊलेख का पाठ, जो िक 250 शÅदȗ से अिधक न हो,संलग्न होगा;  
(ii) वह िकसी ऐसे िवषय से संबंिधत नहीं होगा जो मुख्यत: भारत सरकार का िवषय न हो; 
(iii) उसमȂ िकसी ऐसे िवषय का उÊलेख नहीं होगा िजस पर उसी सतर् मȂ चचार् हो चुकी हो 
अथवा जो सतर् क े दौरान इस िनयम क े अधीन िकसी सदÎय ǎारा पहले ही उठाये गये... "   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yo
u come to the point. I have read the Rule.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI:  Let me read, Sir. You insisted.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, I insisted. You have indicated the Rule. Now, come to the fact 
situation.  …(Interruptions)… I will give you opportunity.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, आपकी रूिंलग  सबके  ऊपर होती है। इस पर भी आपकी रूिंलग  रही है िक 
जो िलखा गया है, िसफर् वही पढ़ा जाएगा। न उसमȂ क ु छ ऐड िकया जा सकता है, न िडलीट िकया 
जा सकता है। मान्यवर, मȅ बड़ी देर से, ध्यान से फॉमर्र Ģाइम िम
िनÎटर को सुन रहा था। जो िलखा 
है, वह उन्हȗने पढ़ा नहीं।  
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
127

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This will not go on record. …(Interruptions)… Pramod ji.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: मेरा मेन ऑÅजेक्शन यह है िक जो िलखा नहीं था, वह पढ़ क ै से रहे थे?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. …(Interruptions)…  Do you want to say?  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: दूसरी बात, Îटेट गवनर्मȂट क े बारे मȂ है। How can he mention? मेरा एक 
अनुरोध है िक इसे एक्सपंज िकया जाए, कायर्वा
 ही से िनकाला जाए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  …(Interruptions)…  You have had your way and say, 
both.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: ठीक है, सर। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have had your way and say, both. Now, Mr. Saket Gokhale, 
before you use your lung power and vocal chords…..…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: No, no. I have a mic now.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Do one thing. Specify a rule.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, in all dignity, raise your point of order.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir,..…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will decide. …(Interruptions)… I will decide, don't bother.  
…(Interruptions)…  I am getting everybody's views.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी साके त गोखले: सर, आप मुझे बोलने से पहले करेक्ट करते हȅ। बोलने क े बाद कीिजए न।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: मेरे को डायरेक्शन मत दीिजए न! It will be
 better for you to go by my 
direction.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, Rule 180B.  …(Interruptions)…   
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Rule 180B? Is it the same as Mr. Pramod Tiwari read?  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: No, no. I am coming to a specific point, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. Which provision of it are you invoking? 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: It is the first one, the sub-clause (i).   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: It is about Special Mentions:  "It shall be accompanied by a 
text of the special mention not exceeding 250 wo rds."  That is (i) I am referring to.  
उसके  बाद मȂ number (iv),  "It shall not raise more  than one issue and the issue shall 
not pertain to trivial matters;"   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, fine.   
 
Ǜी साके त गोखले: उसके  बाद मȂ number (v), "It shall not contain arguments, 
inferences, ironical expressions, imputations, epithets or defamatory statements;". 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have read it. Come to your point now.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Now, the point is, in terms of average word per minute of an 
average speaker, 250 words is roughly about four minutes.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Three.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: It is two to three mi nutes. This is number one. Number two, 
about the text, we all submit Special Mentio ns. The text has to be adhered too. So, 
with due respect, I would like to request yo u to kindly expunge the remarks made by 
the hon. former Prime Minister, Mr. Devegowda.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Is it a point of order? 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Yes, Sir.   
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
129

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay, heard it. Now, Shri  Bhupender Yadav, hon. Minister.  
Bhupenderji, Shri Pramod Tiwari, a very ex perienced Member, has made his 
reflections. I expect on an issue.... ...(Interruptions)... One minute.   
...(Interruptions)... Can't you have patience? I allowed all who wanted to speak.  
Hon. Minister, I said...  ...(Interruptions)...  Mr. Tiruchi Siva has raised a point which 
is very important that an hon. Minister of the Union cannot, even with the permission 
of the Chair, reflect on an issue.  ...(Interruptions)...  So, I have called him. Yes, Mr. 
Bhupender Yadav.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ी ( Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव) : सर, आप बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से 
संचालन करते हȅ और आप एक लंबे समय क े िलए िनयम Ģितपािदत कर सकते हȅ। मȅ आपसे 
िनवेदन करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। सर, रूल  235 से 238 मȂ यह बताया गया है िक सदÎय जब 
बोलȂ, तो क ैसा Ëयवहार करना चािह
ए। जो खुद ही िकसी सदÎय को िडÎटबर् कर रहे हȗ, क्या 
उनको Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र मांगने का अिधकार है,  इसको ÎपÍट कीिजए।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second.   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, जो मȅने बोला है, वह आपकी परिमशन से बोला है। िकसी मंतर्ी को यह 
अिधकार नह
ीं है िक वह चेयरमैन की रूिंलग  पर सवाल उठाए। ये आपकी रूिंलग  पर, जो आपने 
परिमट िक
या था और बोला था, उस पर सवाल उठा रहे हȅ। इसिलए आप इनको डांिटए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... सर, इनको डांिटए।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You want me to decide this also!  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: साहब, इनको डांिटए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No; Mr. Tiwari, you want me to decide this also. One second. 
...(Interruptions)... Yes, Devegowdaji. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: The hon. Minister will co-operate.  
 
Ǜी सभापित: देवेगौड़ा जी, आप बैठक
र  बोिलए, we have respect for your age.   
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: Sir, with your kind permission... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: But, please speak while sitting.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: Sir, in the 60 years of political career, I have never used 
unparliamentary language either  in the Assembly or in the Lok Sabha or in the Rajya 
Sabha. I know my limitations. I have not hurt anybody. I have only spoken facts.  
...(Interruptions)... Even after six days, the State Government, the Chief Minister or 
the Minister nobody has gone there. Is it an unparliamentary word? Let the hon. 
Chairman give the ruling on this issue. If at all, I have made any mistake, I withdraw.  I 
have no hesitation. I don’t want to learn from these friends. Let me be honest. I know 
my limitations. I never hurt anybody. I only  mention the facts. I have never used 
unparliamentary words. I am so sorry. I wo uld like to submit this for your kind 
permission.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will be going on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
Mr. Nagar, don't address the Chair while sitting. You are a physically fit person 
and you have on your right side someone who knows the rules in and out.  So, please 
don't. ...(Interruptions)... It is a serious matter. Therefore,... ...(Interruptions)... 
Now, Mr. Tiruchi Siva. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, we have not said that he ha s mentioned any un-
parliamentary words.  We said that it didn 't confine with the rules.  Rule 180B (v) 
says, "It shall not contain arguments, infere nces, ironical expressions, imputations, 
epithets or defamatory statements."  That is Special Mention.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have look ed into everything and hon. Members 
are, particularly, agitated on one aspect that Special Mention is a mechanism 
whereby a Member has to adhere to the script. What hon. Members, perhaps, 
missed in this case, you will get in my decision on this point of order.  Secondly, all 
Members of this House are respectable. Th ey deserve respect. But to make an 
observation at former Prime Minister is unfor tunate. We have leaders in all parties, we 
respect them. We respect them not becau se others are not equal to them. We 
respect them; we have a civilization, we be lieve in a culture. If Mr. Pramod Tiwari 
rises, I look at him because he has nine years continued membership in the Assembly 
and here. I look at Mr. Mukul Wasnik. I look  at Mr. Digvijaya Singh as Chief Minister 
for ten years. I look at Mr . Praful Patel having had...(Interruptions)...  Mr. Jairam is 
                                                            
 Not recorded.  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
131

 
 
young. Mr. Jairam is young enough not to get into this big league.  
...(Interruptions)...  As a matter of fact, this issu e was raised, in my Chamber and 
otherwise, by Mr. Raghav Chadha, who is raising the hand, and he wanted to claim 
parity. Now, let me tell you with my little experience. All are equal in the family also. All 
are equal when you go to cast vote also. But in the family, you know whose respect is 
more. You don't expect me, when the hon.  former Prime Minister, before saying 
anything, had sought my leave. ...(Interruptions)... No, he sought my leave and he 
is fully aware of the authority of the Chairman. Now I will give my ruling. I prima facie 
find no transgression. But I will give my ru ling when I have to tie my hands and tie my 
feet and run this House, even when I feel th at there is a person of stature. There are 
occasions when ignoring the rule and invoki ng my authority, I granted permission to 
Khargeji. Now would you ask me under what rule , I granted him permission today?  
...(Interruptions)... It was not a point of order. It was granted because he is entitled, 
and this is what I had said in the very be ginning. So hon. Members, bear with me. 
You will get a ruling day after. Now Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla; demand for unified 
law on industrial accidents in India.  
 
Demand for Unified Law on Industrial Accidents in India 
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, industrial workers are 
the backbone of industrialized India, and their safety must be a top priority. The 
consequences of industrial accidents ar e devastating, including loss of life, 
environmental damage, economic disruptions and psychological trauma. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Incidents like the Bhopal Gas Traged y and the recent Thane explosion that 
claimed eleven lives undersc ore the need for a comprehe nsive regulatory reform. 
According to the National Disaster Manage ment Authority (NDMA), there have been 
over 130 significant chemical accidents in th e last decade, resulting in more than 250 
fatalities. These incidents reveal seriou s gaps in our safety regulations and 
enforcement. Currently, industrial safety is governed by 15 acts an d 19 rules, leading 
to overlapping jurisdictions and weak enforc ement. This fragmented approach results 
in significant gaps in oversight and safe ty measures. Moreover, the absence of a 
comprehensive chemical risk database ha mpers effective hazard assessment and the 
development of safety protocols. Insufficient  worker training and poor investment in 
safety infrastructure, often due to cost-cutting measures, further exacerbate the 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
problem. I urge upon the Government to cr eate a unified law on industrial accidents. 
This law should streamline existing regulati ons, establish a centralized database for 
chemical risks, and ensure stringent enforcem ent of safety standards. It should also 
mandate proper training for workers and adeq uate investment in safety infrastructure. 
We owe it to our hardworking industrial workforce to ensure their safety and well-
being.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla: Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahi m (Kerala), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), 
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
S h r i  M .  M o h a m e d  A b d u l l a  ( T a m i l  N a d u ) ,  S h r i  P .  W i l s o n  ( T a m i l  N a d u ) ,  S h r i  H a r i s  
Beeran (Kerala),  and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).  
 Now Shri Neeraj Dangi. 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी: उपसभापित महोदय, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  सर, मेरा माइक ऑन नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपके  पीछे माइक ऑन है। आप जहाँ से बोल रहे हȅ, वहाँ भी माइक ऑन है।  
आप जहाँ खड़े हȅ, वहाँ भी माइक ऑन है। 
 
Demand to increase the amount of Member of Parliament Local Area Development 
Scheme 
i.e. 'MPLAD' 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी (राजÎथान) : उपसभापित महोदय, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद, आपने एक महत्वपूणर् 
िवषय, जो इस ओर और उस ओर क े सभी सांसदȗ क े िलए महत्वपूणर् है, इस िवशेष उÊलेख क े 
जिरए उठाने क े िलए मुझे अवसर Ģदान िकया है। संसद सदÎय Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना 
'एमपीलैड' की शुरुआत  23.12.1993 को पूवर् Ģधानमंतर्ी Ǜी नरिंसह राव ǎारा सभ
ी दलȗ क े 
सांसदȗ क े आगर्ह पर 5 लाख रुपय े Ģित सांसद की रािश से Ģारंभ की गई थी, िजससे सांसद 
अपने क्षेतर् मȂ Îथायी सामुदाियक पिरसंपिǄयȗ क े िनमार्ण सिहत जनता को बुिनयादी सुिवध
ाएँ 
Ģदान करने क े िलए िवकास कायș की िसफािरश कर सकȂ । 
 ' एमपीलैड' फ ं ड की रािश को वषर् 1998-99 मȂ 5 लाख से बढ़ाकर 2 करोड़ रुपय े िकया गया 
और 13 वषर् पÌचाÞ वषर् 2011-12 मȂ सांसदȗ क े आगर्ह पर इसे बढ़ाकर Ģित वषर् 5 करोड़ रुपय े 
िकया गया। वषर् 2011-12 क े बाद 13 वषș मȂ इस रािश को बढ़ाने पर कोई पुनिर्वचार नहीं हुआ।  
 महोदय, एक संसदीय क्षेतर् मȂ लगभग 8 से 10 िवधान  सभा क्षेतर्ȗ का समावेश होता है।  
राजÎथान, उǄर Ģदेश, पंजाब और क ेरल जैसे राज्यȗ मȂ 'िव
धायक Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना' 
क े अंतगर्त रािश कई वषș से पांच करोड़ या 5 करोड़ रुपय े से अिधक है। िदÊली मȂ यह रािश 10 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
133

 
 
करोड़ रुपय े Ģित िवधायक है। ' िवधायक Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना' की रािश और ' सांसद 
Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना' की रािश लगभग समान हो गई है, जबिक आनुपाितक रूप  से यह 
रािश लगभग 8 से 10 गुना होनी चािहए। वहीं िकसी राज्य सभा सांसद क े िलए पूरे राज्य मȂ िवकास 
योजनाओं हेतु 5 करोड़ का सांसद Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास कोष पयार्Ãत नहीं है।  
 अतः आगर्ह है िक 13 वषर् पूवर् िनधार्िरत इस रािश पर पुनिर्वचार करते हुए ' संसद सदÎय 
Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना' की रािश को बढ़ाकर 15 करोड़ रुपय े Ģित सांसद िकया जाना 
चािहए।  महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से मेरा सरकार से आगर्ह है िक MPLADS की रािश 15 करोड़ 
रूपय े करने पर िवचार करȂ।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special
 Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Neeraj Dangi: Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha), A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri R.  Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), 
Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Sh anmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri 
Haris Beeran (Kerala) and Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala). 
 
Government to intervene in the recent hike of import duty for exporters of oranges 
from Vidarbha region in Maharashtra to Bangladesh 
 
DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE (Maharasht ra): Sir, you are aware that in 
Maharashtra State, Amravati and Nagpur Division is recognized as Vidarbha. It is also 
the highest orange-fruit producer and exporter in the country. Total 1,26,000 hectares 
of area is occupied for production of Oranges in Amravati and Nagpur Division.  
Around seven lakh metric tonnes of Oranges are produced in th e season of Ambiya 
and Mriga bahar. The farmers and producer company exporters o f this Division have 
yearly been exporting around 1.25 to 1.50 lakh metric tonnes of Oranges to 
Bangladesh. But, due to hike in Import Duty by Bangladesh Government from Rs. 32 
to Rs. 62 per Kg, the Orange export to Bangladesh has totally been stopped this 
season. Due to multiple-time hikes in Impo rt Duty and devaluation of currency of 
Bangladesh, total Orange export from Vi darbha has suffered. I urge upon the 
Government to look into the matter and im press upon the Government of Bangladesh 
to reduce the Import Duty or support Oran ge exporters by providing 25 to 30 per cent 
subsidy to continue Orange export to Bangladesh. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member,  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde: Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).                                                           
 
Demand for Tribal Circuit for Western Odisha under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
(Kalahandi - Rayagada - Koraput – Kandhamal) 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha): Sir, Odisha has the third highest concentration of 
tribals in India. The tribes have highly de veloped artistic skills, which are evident in 
their body paintings, ornaments, weaving, and wall paintings. The Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme underlines the possibility of a huge potential for better livelihood opportunities 
and improved quality of life of the tribals. Spread across districts, waterfalls, temples 
and wildlife sanctuaries adorn the state. The Majhighariani Temple in Rayagada; 
Gupteshwar Temple in Koraput as well as th e city of Jeypore which is the commercial 
centre of the district; Dokaridara, Gudaha ndi Caves and Phurlijh aran Waterfall in 
Kalahandi; and Mandasaru Gorge are some notable tourist attractions that can form a 
successful tribal circuit. The tribes in  these areas face various development 
challenges and have extremely low annual incomes while working in the unorganized 
sector. The establishment of a tribal ci rcuit under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
would enhance the livelihood of the people around these tourist sites by generating 
local employment opportunities. This provision would also improve tourist 
infrastructure, including transportation facilitie s between districts. An influx of tourists 
would enable local artists to share their cu lture and heritage wi th a wider audience, 
greatly expanding their reach. Sir, I ur ge the Central governm ent to enhance the 
implementation of this provision under th e Swadesh Darshan Scheme. This will aid in 
the development of the area, promote touris m, and bring socio-economic benefits to 
the State. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member,  Shri Sujeet Kumar: A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr . John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Sh rimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
135

 
 
The issue of reconstitution of Marathwada Statutory Development Board 
 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD (Maharashtra): Sir, the Constitution of India has, during its 
formation and various instances appreciat ed the need for targeted development 
activities in various regions of India. Thereb y, Article 371 provided various States with 
the mandate to establish Statutory Development Boards. Through the hon. Governor, 
the State of Maharashtra has thus received the special responsib ility of establishing 
the Marathwada, Vidharbha and Rest of Maharashtra Development Boards, 
respectively. 
Established in 1994, these Boards undertook significant contribution towards 
development of the regions. Their work encompassed areas including MSME growth, 
investment boost and other infrastructure-related activities. 
However, unfortunately, these Boards ha ve not been functioning since June 
2020. Through you, I seek to highlight before the House that these Boards undertake 
an extremely crucial function of ensuring equitable development across the regions. I 
belong to the region of Marathwada and had...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please follow the text strictly. 
 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD: ...witnessed firsthand, the impact of these Development 
Boards on ground. Thus, I seek to stress upon the urgency with which these Boards 
must be reconstituted to benefit the pe ople of Marathwada, Vidharbha and other 
regions. 
The Government has highlighted the importance of Sabka Saath and Sabka 
Vikas, under the leadership of hon. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modiji. The Statutory 
Development Boards will play an extremely im portant role in development in ensuring 
the same. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया जो approved text है, वही पढ़Ȃ। 
 
डा. भागवत कराड़: सर, मȅ वही पढ़ रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: नहीं, चȂज है। 
 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD: Sir, I urge the Govern ment to take positive steps in thi
 s 
direction. 
 
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Bhagwat Karad: Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                         
माननीय Ǜी संजय िंसह। 
 
Concern over abuse of elders 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): मान्यवर, देश मȂ बुजुगș क े साथ दुËयर्वहार और 
उन्हȂ अके ला छोड़ देने क े मामले तेजी से बढ़ रहे हȅ। िजसके  चलते बुजुगș को वृǉ आǛम मȂ रहने 
हेतु मजबूर होना पड़ रहा है। वृǉ Ëयिƪ समाज क े िलए संपिǄ की तरह होते हȅ। हमारी भारतीय 
संÎकृ ित मȂ बुजुगș को बरगद की छांव का दजार् िदया जाता है, लेिकन उसी समाज की एक कड़वी 
सच्चाई यह भी है िक वृǉ लोगȗ क े साथ दुËयर्वहार एक गंभीर समÎया बन चुकी है। िपछले क ु छ 
साल पहले िदÊली क े एक गैर-सरकारी संगठन 'एजवेल फाउंडेशन' ने देश क े 20 राज्यȗ क े 10 
हजार बुजुगș पर एक सवȃक्षण िकया था। इसकी िरपोटर् डराने वाली थी। िरपोटर् क े मुतािब
क लगभग 
23 फीसदी, यानी देश का हर चौथा बुजुगर् देश मȂ अके ला रहने को मजबूर है। यह बुराई क ेवल 
शहरȗ तक ही सीिमत नहीं, बिÊक िरप
ोटर् कहती है िक लगभग 21 फीसदी बुजुगर् गांवȗ मȂ, जबिक 
25 फीसदी बुजुगर् शहरȗ मȂ अके ले रह रहे हȅ। यही कारण है िक संयुƪ राÍटर् भी जागरूकता  क े 
जिरए इसे रोकने क े िलए Ģयासरत है। देश मȂ बुजुगर् मां-बाप या विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े साथ 
दुËयर्वहार को रोकना हम सबकी सामािजक िजÇमेदारी है।    
  महोदय, बुजुगș की यह िÎथित देखते हुए मȅ सरकार से यह मांग करता हूँ िक बुजुगș और 
माता-िपता को छोड़ने और उनके  साथ मारपीट से बचाव हेतु एक सकारात्मक Ģा
वधान लाया 
जाए और बुजुगș क े सामािजक और आिर्थक िहत को सुिनिÌचत िकया जाए। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special
 Mention raised by the hon. Memb er, Shri Sanjay Singh: Shrimati Sulata 
Deo (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Sh ri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Sant Balbir Sing h (Punjab), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand for making tourism management simple and effective by using technology 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, भारत जैसे िवशाल और िविवधता से भरपूर देश 
मȂ ĢौǏोिगकी से पयर्टन का Ģबंधन सरल और Ģभावी बनाया जा सकता है। िरयल टाइम डेटा  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
137

 
 
एनािलिटक्स क े माध्यम से िविभन्न पयर्टन Îथलȗ पर भीड़ का पूवार्नुमान लगाया जा सकता है और 
भीड़ को िनयंितर्त करने क े उपाय िकए जा सकते हȅ। मान्यवर, मोबाइल एÃस और वेबसाइट्स से 
पयर्टकȗ को वतर्मान िÎथित क े बारे मȂ सूिचत करके  उनकी यातर्ा की योजना बेहतर बनाई जा 
सकती है। िडिजटल िटकिंटग िसÎटम और ऑनलाइन बुिंकग ÃलेटफॉÇसर् क े माध्यम से पयर्टन 
Îथलȗ पर लंबी कतारȗ को कम िकया जा सकता है। क्यू आर कोड Îकै िंनग और ई-िटकट्स का 
उपयोग करके  Ģवेश Ģिकर्या को सुËयविÎथत िकया जा सकता है, िजससे पयर्टकȗ का समय 
बचेगा और उनका अनुभव सुखद रहेगा।  आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस (एआई) और मशीन लिनȊग 
का उपयोग करके  पयर्टन Îथलȗ की सुरक्षा बढ़ाई जा सकती है।  िनगरानी क ैमरȗ और सȂसरȗ क े 
माध्यम से संिदग्ध गितिविधयȗ की पहचान की जा सकती है और तुरंत कारर्वाई भी की जा सकती 
है।  अंततः सोशल मीिडया और िडिजटल माकȃिंटग का उपयोग करके  िविभन्न पयर्टन Îथलȗ को 
वैिÌवक Îतर पर Ģमोट िकया जा सकता है, िजससे Îथानीय अथर्ËयवÎथा को बढ़ावा िमलता है 
और अंतरार्Íटर्ीय पयर्टकȗ की संख्या मȂ वृिǉ होती है।  
 अतः मȅ माननीय पयर्टन मंतर्ी जी से अनुरोध करती हूँ िक वे इस तरह की कोई ËयवÎथा 
िकर्यािन्वत करȂ, िजससे पयर्टकȗ को सुगमता हो सके  और पयर्टन Îथलȗ को भी पॉपुलेशन Ģेशर से 
मुƪ िकया जा सके । महोदय, वषर् 2047 तक िवकिसत भारत बनाने की मोदी जी की गारंटी मȂ 
पयर्टन की अहम भूिमका होगी, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh rimati Sumitra Balmik: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (O disha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Sulata Dev (Odisha), Shri Abdul Wahab (Kerala) and Shri Dhanjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra). 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती एस. फान्गनॉन कोन्याक)पीठासीन हुईं।] 
 
Demand for reservation of seats for Limboo and Tamang Scheduled Tribe 
Communities in the Sikkim Legislative Assembly 
 
SHRI DORJEE TSHERING LEPCHA (Sikkim) : Sir, Limboo and Tamang Communities 
were included in the list of Scheduled Tribes in the year 2003. These communities are 
constitutionally entitled to reservation in the Sikkim Legislative Assembly in terms of 
Article 332 read with Article 371F (f) of the Constitution. In the past the Government 
of Sikkim had taken several steps to get reservation of Limboo and Tamang 
communities in the Assembly and resolutions were also passed by the Assembly for 
the purpose. 
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
On the direction of the Supreme Court in 2016, things started moving in 
positive direction but nothing had happe ned. Before the General Elections and 
Assembly Elections in Sikkim in 2019 this issue was under active consideration of the 
GOI and it was proposed to increase the s eats of the Sikkim Assembly from 32 to 40 
and provide reservation to the Limboo and Tamang. But the proposal did not move 
further even though it was at a very advanced stage. 
Recently, the Supreme Court in case of Public Interest Committee for 
Scheduling Specific Areas Vs UoI 2023 has clear ly said that Parliament is competent 
to provide necessary reservation to the Limboo and Tamang communities by 
amending the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
The Elections of 2024 have also passed. A thing which was appearing so close 
in 2019 could not be given in 2024. Sir, 21 years have passed but the Limboo and 
Tamang ST Communities have still not got their Constitutional rights. It is high-time 
that these communities are given representa tion in the Sikkim Assembly. I urge the 
Government to look into the matter.                                                                                  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (Shrimati S. Ph angnon Konyak): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri 
Dorjee Tshering Lepcha: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                          
Shri Ramji Lal Suman – hon. Member not present.  Next, Shri P.L. Suneer.   
 
Demand for holistic development of Kozhikode International Airport  
 
SHRI P.P. SUNEER (Kerala): Madam Vice- Chairman, The Kozhikode International 
Airport is an international airport serving th e Malabar region, consisting of Kozhikode, 
Malappuram, Wayanad and Palakkad in Kerala. The Kozhikode International Airport is 
country’s 21st busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic having handled 33,20,250 
passengers in the year 2023-24. According to  projections, the Kozhikode Airport will 
see growth both in terms of passengers and cargo volume in future and forward 
looking development of the airport is necessary to keep up with time and to serve the 
people better. The Kozhikode Airport se rves as a major transport hub for the 
expatriate Malayali community from the districts of Kozhikode, Malappuram, 
Wayanad and Palakkad. It is the only airpor t in Kerala being operated by the Airport 
Authority of India (AAI). Despite its impo rtance in serving the people of Malabar 
region, many facilities are lacking. Internat ional passengers often ha ve to wait for the 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
139

 
 
lack of Immigration Officers. Being one of the rare airports in India with a table-top 
runway, the geographical challenges are also unique. In the light of the importance of 
Kozhikode Airport, international and domest ic flights should be increased from all 
major cities of India and Gulf countries. Ke rala Government has already acquired land 
for the expansion of airport and runway, with proper compensation to residents. The 
runway correction work should be conclude d timely, keeping in mind the growth in 
the number of passengers and to enable large aircrafts land safely. The AAI should 
also focus on providing modern and passenger  friendly services in both the terminals 
to make travel hassle free. I urge upon the Government to look into the matter.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri P.P. Suneer:  Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) , Dr. John Brittas, Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Ker ala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Shri Sandosh Kumar P. (Kerala).   
Now, hon. Member, Shri A.D. Singh – not present.  Next, Dr. Medha Vishram 
Kulkarni.  
 
Demand for conservation of Shaniwar Wada Architecture of Pune 
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलकणीर् (महाराÍटर्): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपका ध्यान पुणे क े 
महत्वपूणर् ऐितहािसक Îथल शिनवार वाड़ा की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूँ, िजसकी िÎथित 
वतर्मान मȂ बहुत खराब है। यह गर्ेड ए हेिरटेज संरचना भारतीय पुरात
 त्व सवȃक्षण (ASI) की 
देखरेख मȂ है। वषर् 1736 मȂ मराठा साĦाज्य की िवरासत क े रूप  मȂ Îथािपत िकया गया यह वाÎतु 
भारतीय इितहास का महत्वपूणर् िहÎसा है। 
 पेशवा बाजीराव Ģथम ने 1736 मȂ इस महल का िनमार्ण शुरू  िकया, जो पेशवाओं का 
मुख्यालय था और भारतीय उपमहाǎ
ीप क े सबसे शिƪशाली क Ȃदर्ȗ मȂ से एक था। हालांिक, वषर् 
1828 मȂ एक भयानक आग ने इसका अिधकांश िहÎसा नÍट कर िदया। यह महल िĤिटशȗ क े 
आगमन से पह
ले क े Îवदेशी साĦाज्य का Ģतीक है। 
 शिनवार वाड़ा की उिचत देखभाल और रखरखाव ना होने क े कारण इसकी िÎथित जजर्र 
हो गई है। इसके  अिधकांश िहÎसे कमजोर हो गए है और कभी भी िग रने का खतरा है। क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार ने Îमारक की िबगड़ती िÎथित को सुधारने का िनदȃश िदया है, लेिकन कोई कायर् नहीं 
हुआ है। इस ऐितहािसक Îथल की मरÇमत और संरक्षण बहुत ज़रूरी है, िजससे हमारी सांÎकृ ित क 
धरोहर सुरिक्षत रहे और पयर्टन को भी बढ़ावा िमले। शिनवार वाड़ा न क ेवल हमारे इितहास का 
Ģतीक है, बिÊक आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ क े िलए एक महत्वपूणर् शैिक्षक संसाधन भी है। 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

अत: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से अनुरोध करती हूँ िक इस महल की मरÇमत और रखरखाव 
का कायर् जÊद िकया जाए और एक सिमित ǎारा इस Îथल की िÎथित का मूÊयांकन कर िवशेष 
धन रािश का आवंटन िकया जाए तािक यह कायर् जÊदी संपन्न हो सके । 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPER
SON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention raised by the hon. 
Member, Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni:  Dr . Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra).   
Now, hon. Member, Shri Satnam Sing h Sandhu – not present.  Next, hon. 
Member, Shri Abdul Wahab.   
 
The issue of Life and Medical Insurance and Public Sector Insurance Companies 
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala): Thank you, Ma dam, for giving me an opportunity to 
speak. I urge the Government to take foll owing steps in the best interests of the 
people and the industry: First is remova l of GST on Life and Medical Insurance 
Premiums. Presently, both life and medical insurance premiums attract a GST rate of 
18 percentage, be withdrawn in the interest of the people and the industry. 
 Second is about re-introduction of In come tax deduction for health insurance 
premium. The deduction allowed under s ection 80 (D) towards health insurance 
premium has been discontinued in the new tax regime.  
 Third is about consolidation of Public S ector general insurance companies. The   
Public Sector general insurance companie s have been recording reasonably good 
performance in spite of myriad challenges confronting them. There is an opinion of 
merit that these companies be merged into a single entity to form a single corporation 
so that they derive the economies of scale. I would like to request the Ministry of 
Finance to consider these important subjects and take a favourable decision on these 
suggestions.  Thank you.                                                                                
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with  the Special Mention made by the hon. 
Member, Shri Abdul Wahab:  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala),  Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odisha),  
Shri P.P. Suneer (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla, (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, (Kerala)  and  Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha). 
 Now, hon. Member, Dr. Bhim Singh. 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
141

Demand to increase the number of beds in emergency ward of AIIMS, Patna 
 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार): महोदय, मौजूदा सरकार धन्यवाद की पातर् है, िजसने िबहार मȂ एक एÇस 
क े रहते दूसरा एÇस िदया। पहला एÇस तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की 
सरकार ने पटना मȂ िदया। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने दूसरा एÇस दरभंगा मȂ िदया 
है। पटना एÇस जनता की सेवा मȂ तत्पर है, परंतु जनĢितिनिध होने क े नाते आए िदन सवर् साधारण 
से सूचना ĢाÃत होती रही है िक एÇस पटना क े इमर
जȂसी िवभाग मȂ बेड की संख्या मांग की तुलना 
मȂ काफी कम है। िलहाजा जरूरतम ंद रोिगयȗ की वहां भतीर् नहीं हो पाती और वे Ģाइवेट अÎपत
ालȗ 
क े चंगुल मȂ फ ंसकर अपने जान-माल से हाथ धो बैठते हȅ।  
 अत: मȅ सरकार से मांग करता हूं िक पटना एÇ
स क े इमरजȂसी िवभाग मȂ बेड की संख्या 
बढ़ाई जाने क े साथ-साथ वहां की अन्य सुिवधाओं मȂ भी बढ़ोतरी की जाए, तािक िबहार की गरीब 
जनता को सुलभ एवं सÎता ईलाज ĢाÃत हो सके । 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPER
SON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with  the Special Mention made by the hon. 
Member, Dr. Bhim Singh:  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla, (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wils on (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha). 
Now, hon. Member, Shri Haris Beeran. 
 
Demand for Nipah viral testing facilities in Kerala 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala): Madam, I wish  to draw your attention to Nipah virus 
outbreaks in Kerala which has been declared  as health emergency. The deadly virus 
resulted in the death of a 14-year-old bo y last Sunday. Nipah virus outbreaks have 
haunted Kerala on four occasions in the past. Outbreaks of the virus were reported in 
2018 and 2023 in Kozhikode and 2019 in Erna kulam. The Department of Health in 
Kerala has taken precautionary measures and multiple level surveillance mechanism is 
in place. But the biggest impediment being faced in such diseases outbreaks, which 
was seen also during Nipah virus outbreak, is  the inadequacy of virus testing facilities 
in the country. Currently, for viral testing, the only centre in India is the National 
Institute of Virology in Pune. It is a matt er of grave concern that there is only one 
advanced centre for virology testing caterin g to 140 million population of the country. 
It is highly inadequate in a country like Indi a to have only one viral testing centre and 
this delays the detection and containment of  the deadly infectious disease like NIPAH 
and other similar diseases.  NIV Pune, the re sult has come after a week’s time, which 
is causing delay in roll-out of strategy of containment of such deadly infectious 
 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
diseases. I, therefore, request the Minist ry of Health and Family Welfare to take 
immediate steps to provide funding suppor t to develop viral testing facilities in 
National Institute of Virology in Alappu zha and Institute of Advance Virology in 
Trivandrum and make them Center of Excel lence to tackle such  disease outbreaks. 
Thank you. 
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Madam, we request you to  extend the time t ill the completion of 
Special Mentions.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): We will extend the 
time at 6.00 p.m.  
 The following Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made 
by hon. Member, Shri Haris Beeran: Shri  Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim (K erala), Shri P.P. Suneer (Kerala), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri P Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).   
Now, Shrimati Sagarika Ghose.  
 
The need to ensure efficient implementation of MNREGS 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal): Madam, I seek to draw attention to 
the urgent need to ensure efficient implem entation of the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.  
The Budget Estimate for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme was Rs. 60,000 crores for Financial Year, 2023-24. This had to be 
increased to Rs. 89,000 crores. The Union Government has been claiming that 
availability of funds shall not hinder the implementation of the NREGA. But the 
Government has already utilised 42 per cent  of the funds allocated under the Interim 
Budget for Financial Year, 2024-25. Additionally, the Government is considering 
distributing excess rice for part-payment of the wages. Since most workers are PDS-
beneficiaries, receiving rice during high in flation offers less flexibility and purchasing 
power than cash wages. 
As of January 1, 2024, Aadhar Based Payment System ha s been mandated 
within the framework of NREG A. More than 1.5 crore workers are yet to be ABPS 
(Aadhaar Payment Bridge System) enabled.  The opacity of the ABPS architecture 
makes it impossible for workers to track  which account their payment has been 
deposited in, leading to diverted and mi sdirected payments. Any deviations or 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
143

 
 
inaccuracies could lead to a situation wherei n rural workers may be deprived of their 
rightfully-earned wages, especially, people  from marginalised backgrounds. There 
are concerns over mandatory digital atte ndance, deletions of job cards, delayed 
disbursements, and unresolved dues to States. MNREGA promises work, wages and 
dignity to millions of Indians.  
I urge the Government to urgently address these issues to ensure efficient 
implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK): The following 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Shrimati Sagarika Ghose: Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shrimati Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), 
and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala)                                                               
Shri Narain Dass Gupta; not present. Now, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu. 
 
Concern over access to washrooms, sanitation facilities like toilets in educational  
institutions and work places for women across the country 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu): Madam, my subject is, ‘Concern over 
Access to Washrooms, Sanitation Facilities lik e Toilets in Educational Institutions and 
Workplaces for Women across the country.’   
Madam, it is disheartening to see India' s Nari Shakti being troubled due to the 
inadequate toilets and sanitation facilities at educational institutions and workplaces. 
Although the number of women in the sp heres of education and workforce is 
on the rise, the provision of sufficient and adequate toilet facilities for them is still sadly 
lacking. 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PATIDAR) in the Chair.] 
 
From Schools to colleges, banks to pu blic offices, the women are forced to 
bear with the nature's call for long hours. This is absolutely ridiculous and shameful. 
Madam, women workers form a large pr oportion of the workforce in the 
informal or unorganized sectors. Unfortunately, most workplaces and work activities 
in the informal sectors lack basic sanitation facilities and toilets. 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

The lack of access to  proper sanitation facilities, separate, hygienic toilets and 
clean water not only affects the physical h ealth of women, but also their self-esteem, 
dignity and safety, and makes it difficult fo r them to participate in the workforce and 
contribute to the economic development of the country.  
Madam, lack of proper sanitation and hygiene facilities for working women in 
India is an urgent issue that needs to be  addressed. Improving access to toilets and 
clean water and ensuring adequate hygien e facilities in workplaces would help to 
empower women and promote gender equality. 
Therefore, I urge the Union Government  to address this very sensitive women 
issue immediately in all the educationa l institutions and workplaces across the 
country. Thank you.                                                     
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA  PATIDAR): The following Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shrimati 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu: Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri 
K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri 
P.P. Suneer (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Ker ala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri 
R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala) and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala)  
 
6.00 P. M.  
 
Hon. Members, it is now 6.00 p.m. If the House agrees, we may sit beyond 6.00 
p.m. to take up the remaining permitted Special Mentions. Do I have the leave of the 
House to extend the sitting be yond 6.00 p.m.? Thank you. हम इसे क ं टीन्यू करते हȅ। 
Thank you. माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश जी।  
 
Demand for change in the timing of Ranchi-Patna Jan Shatabdi Express 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश (झारखंड): आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन क े 
समक्ष एक महत्वपूणर् िवष
य लाना चाहता हूँ। वतर्मान मȂ सुबह क े समय पटना से रांची क े िलए दो 
संचािलत टर्ेने वंदे भारत एक्सĢेस (22349) व जनशताÅदी एक्सĢेस (12365) मȂ से जनशताÅदी 
एक्सĢेस को सुबह क े समय रांची से पटना को  संचािलत िक ए जाने की आवÌयकता है। क्यȗिक 
सुबह क े समय मातर् एक घण्टे क े अंतराल पर पटना से राँची क े िलए दो एक्सĢेस टर्ेनȂ संचािलत हो 
रही हȅ, जबिक रांची से पटना क े िलए इसी समय कोई एक्सĢेस टर्ेन नही है। महोदया, अगर 
जनशताÅदी एक्सĢेस को सुबह क े समय मȂ रांची से पटना को संचािलत िकया जाता है, तो न िसफर्  
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
145

 
 
लोगो क े आवागमन मȂ सुिवधा होगी, बिÊक रेलवे की आय मȂ भी वृिǉ होगी। मȅ सरकार से इस 
मामले पर गौर करने का आगर्ह करता हूं। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KAVI TA PATIDAR): The following Members 
associated with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Deepak Prakash: 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                          
Hon. Member, Shrimati Sangeeta Yada v - not present. Hon. Member, Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade. 
 
Demand for reservation for Scheduled Tribes in the Goa Legislative Assembly 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE ( G o a ) :  M a d a m ,  I  r i s e  t o  d r a w  t h e  
attention of this august House to an urgent and significant issue pertaining to the 
political representation of Scheduled Tribes in the Goa Legislative Assembly. 
Goa, with its rich cultural heritage and diverse population, is home to several 
Scheduled Tribes that have been integral to the social and economic fabric of the 
state. Despite their contributions, the Scheduled Tribes in Goa have not been 
adequately represented in th e State’s Legislative Assembly . The Indian Constitution 
guarantees political reservations for Sche duled Tribes to ensure their meaningful 
participation in the democratic process and to address their unique social, economic, 
and cultural challenges. However, in Goa, there is currently no political reservation for
  
Scheduled Tribes in the St ate Assembly, which hampers their ability to influence 
policies and decisions that directly affect their lives. This lack of representation 
impedes the empowerment and development of the Scheduled Tribes in Goa. We 
must address this issue to ensure inclusive governance and equitable development. 
I urge the Government to take immedi ate steps to amend the representation 
norms and provide political reservations for Scheduled Tribes in the Goa Legislative 
Assembly. This measure is essential to upho ld the constitutional rights of Scheduled 
Tribes and to promote their active participation in the democratic process. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KAVI TA PATIDAR): The following Members 
associated with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Sadanand Mhalu 
Shet Tanavade: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tam il Nadu) and Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala). 
Hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra. 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand for inclusion of languages spoken in Odisha into the 8th Schedule of 
Constitution 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Hon. Vice -Chairman Madam, the Ho, Mundari, 
Bhumij, Kui, Saora and Kosli/ Sambalpuri la nguages spoken in Odisha are rich with 
their respective history, legacy, heritage , culture and literature. There are long-
standing demands from the people of Od isha speaking these languages, for their 
inclusion in the 8th Schedule of the Indian Constituti on. Despite several letters by then 
Chief Minister of Odisha to the Governme nt of India and several demands placed in 
both Houses of Parliament by Members of  Parliament, these la nguages have not yet 
been included in the 8 th Schedule of the Constitution by the Union Government. The 
Odisha Cabinet has also resolved several times, through unanimous resolutions, for 
the inclusion of some of these languages in the 8 th Schedule. Santhali language has 
been added to the 8 th Schedule, but Ho, Mundari, Bh umij, Kui and Saoara, spoken 
by millions of tribal brothers and sisters in  Odisha, have not been  included in it. The 
Kosli/ Sambalpuri language spoken by the brothers and sisters of western Odisha is 
rich in literature, culture, history and heritage but that has also been kept waiting 
outside the 8 th Schedule. I urge the Government of India to take necessary steps to 
ensure that Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui, Saora and Kosli/Sambalpuri are included in the 
8
th Schedule of the Constitution. The offici al recognition of these languages by the 
Government of India through their inclusion in the 8 th Schedule will go a long way in 
their development and growth.                                                                               
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Ment ion made by Dr. Sasmit Patra: Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri P. Wils on (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sulata Deo 
(Odisha) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).                                                                      
 
Demand for awareness campaign of Central Government schemes through banks 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ ( उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, सरकार ने सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, 
सबका िवÌवास क े मंतर् क े साथ समाज क े हर वगर् क े िवकास क े िलए बहुत सारी योजनाएं शुरू की 
हȅ। बजट 2024 मȂ भी रोजगार, कौशल Ģिशक्षण और अन्य अवसरȗ की सुिवधा उपलÅध कराने क े 
िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की पाँच योजनाओं क े पैक े ज की घोषणा की गई है, िजससे पाँच वषर् की अविध 
मȂ 4.1 करोड़ युवाओं को लाभ होगा। मुदर्ा योजना, Îटाटर्अप इंिडया, Îटȅड अप इंिडया, Ģधान मंतर्ी 
Îविनिध योजना जैसी िविभन्न योजनाएं हȅ, िजससे हर वगर् क े नागिरक लाभािन्वत हो सकते हȅ 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
147

और इन योजनाओं क े लागू होने से फाइनȂिशयल इनक्लूज़न और इकोनॉिमक डेवलपमȂट भी होता 
है।  
 सरकार योजनाओं को लागू करने का पूरा Ģयास कर रही है, लेिकन जमीनी Îतर पर 
इसके  लाभ को पहुंचाने क े िलए अत्यंत आवÌयक है िक हम लाभािर्थयȗ को इसके  Ģित जागरूक  
करȂ। इस जागरूकता  अिभयान मȂ सब
से महत्वपूणर् भूिमका हमारे बȅकȗ की हो सकती है। आज 
हमारे देश मȂ 1,60,000 से भी अिधक बȅक शाखाएं हȅ, िजनका अिÎतत्व गर्ामीण इलाकȗ मȂ भी है। 
मेरी सरकार से माँग है िक इन सभी बȅक शाखाओं मȂ एक डेिडके टेड हेÊप डेÎक की Îथापना हो, 
जो हमारी योजनाओं का Ģचार-Ģसार करे और लाभािर्थयȗ को जागरूक  करे िक िकस Ģकार वे 
भारत सरकार की योजनाओं का लाभ ले सकते हȅ। इन हेÊप डेÎक क े गठन से हर नागिरक को 
उसका अिधकार िमलेगा और पंिƪ मȂ खड़े अंित
म Ëयिƪ क े िवकास और अंत्योदय क े लÑय को भी 
हम ĢाÃत कर सकȂ गे।                                                                     
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. M
embers 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by Shri Sanjay Seth: Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha).                                      
 
Demand to expedite projects under Bharatmala in the State of Bihar 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल (िबहार): आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारतमाला 
पिरयोजना भारत क े 550 से अिधक िजला मुख्यालयȗ को छ: लेन राजमागș क े माध्यम से जोड़ने 
का कायर् हो रहा है। राजमागș और सड़कȗ क े िवक
 ास क े अलावा, पिरयोजना का एक मुख्य उǈेÌय 
राजमागș क े माध्यम से माल ढ ुलाई दक्षता मȂ सुधार करना है। इसके  अलावा, भारतीय राÍटर्ीय 
राजमागर् Ģािधकरण का महत्वाकांक्षी छ: लेन गर्ीनफीÊड वाराणसी-राँची-कोलकाता एक्सĢेसवे 
िबहार क े क ै मूर, रोहताश, औरंगाबाद और गया िजलȗ से होकर गुजरेगा। 610 िकलोमीटर लंबे 
वाराणसी-कोलकाता कॉिरडोर मȂ से 162 िकलोमीटर िबहार मȂ होगा।  
 क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने पटना मȂ एनएच 30 पर अनीसाबाद से गुरुǎारा मोड़ तक 1,000 करोड़ 
रुपय े की लागत से 15 िकलोमीटर लंबी एिलवेटेड रोड बनाने का भी फ ैसला िकया है।  
 वतर्मान मȂ िबहार क े कई िजलȗ मȂ पुलȗ का िनमार्ण िकया जा रहा है और क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने 
इन कायș को िलए 23,157 करोड़ रुपय े आवंिटत िकए हȅ। इस के  अलावा, फतुहा, पटना मȂ 100 
एकड़ भूिम पर पहले मÊटी मॉडल लॉिजिÎटक पाकर् क े िवकास क े िलए काम िकया जा रहा है। 
क Ȃ दर् ने इसके  िलए 1,000 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान भी िकया है।  
 महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से माननीय क Ȃदर्ीय मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह है िक िबहार मȂ अिधक ांश 
िजले आकांक्षी हȅ, इसीिलए इन सभी पिरयोजनाओं क े कायर् मȂ तेजी लाई जाए, तािक िबहार मȂ 
िवकास जÊद हो और एनएच क े दोनȗ तरफ जो अितकर्मण है, उसे हटाया जाए। एनएच पर सोलर 
लाइट का भी इंतज
ाम िकया जाए, िजससे िक एनएच पर होने वाली दुघर्टनाओं को कम िकया जा 
सके ।  
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), associated himself with the Special Mention made by the hon. 
Member, Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel.  
 Now, Shri P. Wilson. Concern over en ergy security projects in Tamil Nadu. 
 
Concern over energy security projects in Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): TANGEDCO, the Tamil Nadu State Power Utility, has 
initiated the development of a 2x800 MW Su per Critical Thermal project at Uppur in 
Ramanathapuram District. Similarly, th e 1,320 MW Udangudi Stage-I is nearing 
completion, with potential for further development of 2,640 MW through Udangudi 
Stage II & III. The State Government has gr anted administrative approval. Existing 
coal handling infrastructure, including a coal  jetty and closed conveyor systems, are 
in place for all three stages. 
  Considering that the development of in-S tate projects is vital for the growth, it 
is proposed by state that NTPC and NLC undertake further development of these 
projects with an estimated cost of ₹30,000 crores. The electricity generated could be 
utilized by Tamil Nadu and other southern  states, as the capacity of existing 
transmission lines is nearly maxed out, and establishing new lines could take 8-10 
years. 
  Enabling these projects by NTPC and NL C will enhance the energy security of 
Tamil Nadu and other southern states.  Additionally, the power demand in Tamil Nadu 
is increasing at a higher ra te compared to other states , expected to cross a peak 
demand of 21,000 MW by 2025-26. Presently, Tamil Nadu receives only 55 per cent of 
power from Units I and II of the Kudankul am Nuclear Power Pl ant (KKNPP), roughly 
1,150 MW. With Units III and IV expected to be completed by 2025, it is urged that 100 
per cent allocation from Unit III and IV be gr anted to Tamil Nadu to meet the growing 
demand and make State of Tamil Nadu without power cuts. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri P. 
Wilson: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. John Bri ttas (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala). 
 Now, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal. Concern over attacks by stray animals in the 
country. 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
149

 
 
Concern over attacks by stray animals in the country 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हम सब social media पर वीिडयो 
देखते है, जहाँ आवारा पशु बच्चȗ और बुज़ुगș पर हमला करते है और बिंठडा मȂ एक ऐसा मामला 
सामने आया, जहाँ एक 5 वषर् की बच्ची पर stray animal ने हमला कर िदया, िजससे उस की मृत्यु 
हो गयी।  पूरे देश मȂ dog bites क े cases, जो 2022 मȂ 21 लाख थे, वे 2023 मȂ 28 लाख हो गए 
और WHO क े अनुसार पूरे िवÌव मȂ 36 Ģितशत rabies-related deaths भारत मȂ होती हȅ।  इसका 
संज्ञान देश क े High Courts और सुĢीम कोटर् ǎारा भी िलया गया है।  U K क े ĢितिÍठत medical 
journal लांसेट क े अनुसार हमारे देश मȂ हर वषर् 59,000 मृत्यु stray animal attack क े कारण 
होती हȅ। सरकार ने 2023 मȂ Animal Birth Control Rules बनाए, िजनमȂ sterilization और 
population control की strategy का इÎतेमाल िकया गया है और Animal Welfare Board ǎारा 
animal shelter बनाने क े िलए आिर्थक सहायता भी देने की योजना है, लेिकन इन योजनाओं से 
जो पिरणाम अपेिक्षत थे, वे पूरे नहीं हुए हȅ। मेरा सरकार से िनवेदन है िक आवारा पशुओं क े 
rehabilitation क े िलए Îवच्छ भारत योजना क े अंतगर्त एक dedicated strategy की शुरुआत  
करने की आवÌयकता है, िजससे Åलॉक, वाडर् या तालुका Îतर पर आवारा पशुओं क े िलए shelter 
का िनमार्ण िकया जा सके  और man-animal co
nflict क े बढ़ते मामलȗ पर भी अंक ु श लग सके ।  
सरकार को Îवच्छ भारत मȂ urban local bodies की रȅिंकग मȂ stray animal manage ment को 
भी एक criteria बनाना चािहए, िजससे Urban Local Bodies बेहतर तरीके  से बढ़ते मामलȗ को 
काबू कर सके ।         
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Dr. Ashok 
Kumar Mittal:  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr . John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sant Balbir 
Singh (Punjab), Shri Abdul Wahab (Kerala) , Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Na du), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu).                                                            
 
Concern over difficulties faced by pilgrims in Char Dham Yatra in Uttarakhand 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार (िहमाचल Ģदेश): मैडम, आपने Îपेशल मȂशन क े तहत एक महत्व पूणर् िवषय 
पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए बहुत- बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 मȅ आपका ध्यान उǄराखंड राज्य मȂ चार धाम यातर्ा की समÎया की ओर िदलाना चाहता 
हूँ।  उǄराखंड क े क्षेतर् मȂ िÎथत चार पिवतर् िंहदू तीथर् Îथल हȅ। यह न क ेवल एक धािर्मक यातर्ा है, 
बिÊक उǄराखंड क े िलए एक महत्वपूणर् सांÎकृ ितक और पयर्टन कायर्कर्म भी है, जो दुिनया भर से 
पयर्टकȗ को आकिर्षत करती है। यह Îथानीय समुदायȗ क े िलए महत्वपूणर् है, जो रोजगार क े 
अवसर Ģदान करती है। कोिवड-19 क े बाद यहाँ पर आने वाले Ǜǉालुओं की संख्या मȂ बढ़ोतरी हुई 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
है, िजसके  कारण िचिकत्सा एवं ÎवाÎथ्य से लेकर पिरवहन, आवास एवं शौचालय जैसी सुिवधाओं 
क े िलए सरकारी इंतजाम नाकाफी सािबत हुए हȅ और यातर्ा पर आने वाले Ǜǉालुओं को 
रिजÎटर्ेशन, हेलीकॉÃटर बुिंकग, पािकȊ ग तथा ऑनलाइन बुिंकग मȂ साइबर ठगȗ ǎारा लूटना तथा 
और भी परेशािनयȗ का सामना करना पड़ा है, िजसके  कारण बहुत से Ǜǉालुओं को िबना चार धाम 
यातर्ा पूरी िकए वापस लौटना पड़ा और कई Ǜǉालुओं की मृत्यु भी हुई है। 
 मेरा पयर्टन मंतर्ी से आगर्ह है िक चार धाम यातर्ा पर आने वाले Ǜǉालुओं की सुिवधाओं से 
संबंिधत अिधकािरयȗ ǎारा आगामी वषș की चार धाम यातर्ा क े िलए उिचत सुिवधाओं क े Ģबंध की 
समीक्षा पहले ही संपूणर् कर ली जाए, िजससे चार धाम यातर्ा मȂ आने वाले Ǜǉालुओं को कोई 
परेशानी न हो।  धन्यवाद।                               
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), associated himself with th e Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Dr. Sikander Kumar.   
 
Need for Reconsideration of NCTE’s oversight of NIOS D.El.Ed (ODL) programme  
 
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar): In a quest to uphold the Right to Education Act 
2009, the National Council for Teacher Ed ucation issued a notification in 2010, 
requiring a minimum qualification of a tw o-year diploma in elementary education. 
After NCTE’s 2014 regulations, the Minist ry of Human Resource Development issued 
a letter on 03-08-2017 to all the Secretaries of States an d UTs directing that all the 
teachers in Government Schools must possess minimum qualification as mandated 
under the RTE Act and a last chance was bein g given to all such teachers to acquire 
minimum qualification till 31-03-2019. In 2017, an opportunity arose for in-service 
untrained teachers of Government, Govern ment Aided, Unaide d Private Schools, 
classes I-VIII, to acquire Diploma in Elemen tary Education, D.El.Ed., from National 
Institute of Open Schooling in ODL mode i n  1 8  m o n t h s  i n s t e a d  o f  t w o  y e a r s .  T h e  
Supreme Court ruling on November 28, 2023, emphasized that the entire scheme was 
only for the purpose of providing a window to the in-service teache rs to prevent their 
dismissal. The delay in publishing notifications left approximately 14 lakh candidates in 
limbo, as the NCTE failed to publish the Gazette directed by the MHRD on September 
22, 2017. States like Bihar and West Bengal  have appointed teachers trained through 
the NIOS 18-month course.   
I urge the Government to reconsider the NCTE's non-recognition of the NIOS 
18-month D.El.Ed course, ensuring equal opportunities for the affected candidates at 
the earliest.  Thank you, Madam. 
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
151

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by hon. Member, Shri Manoj 
Kumar Jha: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Abdul Wahab 
(Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 
Demand for adequate budgetary allocation for ensuring safety of mining workers 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha): Odisha has one of the highest co al reserves in the 
country at 48,572.58 million tonnes (meas ured) and 34,080.42 million tonnes 
(indicated), which increases the importance of ensuring the safety of the mining 
workers. However, in spite of the urgency of the matter, the budget for the Ministry of 
Coal has been declining for the past two years. It has fallen down to Rs. 547.88 
crores (Revised Estimates) in 2022-23. Under-utilisation of funds is another cause of 
concern, reflective in how the utilisation of funds during the financial year 2021-22 was 
Rs. 360.97 crores (up to December, 2021) against the allocation of Rs. 644.09 crores 
at RE stage. Mining is an extremely haza rdous profession and disasters in this area 
cause grave threat to human life and loss of economic resources. Inundation is a 
factor that is leading to a greater number of disasters in mines. Disasters occur at 
regular intervals. Fatalities due to roof co llapse and dumpers at coal mines are major 
issues that need to be tackled for greater safety. Another cause of concern is the lack 
of detailed emergency rescue plan. 
 Training of personnel, implementation of Standard Operating Procedure, etc., 
need to be emphasized. Training is requ ired to minimise human error. Madam, 
through you, I urge the Central Governme nt to take its cognisance and provide 
adequate funding for research and in frastructure development among other 
processes and ensure proper mechanism for safety for mining workers. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Niranjan Bishi: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Sh ri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odish a), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Subhasish K huntia (Odisha), Shri Muzibulla Khan 
(Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).  
 
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Demand for bringing back the royal throne of Maharaja Ranjit Singh ji 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा (पंजाब): महोदय, मȅ एक ऐसे मुǈे पर बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ, िजससे िसफर् 
पंजाब नहीं, बिÊक पूरे देश की भावनाएँ जुड़ी हुई हȅ। मेरा सौभाग्य है िक मȅ उस पंजाब से आता हूँ, 
जहाँ कभी शेर-ए-पंजाब महाराजा रणजीत िंसह जी का शासन था और महाराजा रणजीत िंसह 
जी का शास
न असल मायनȗ मȂ सुशासन था, जहाँ सबको न्याय िमलता था। वे ऐसे महान योǉा थे, 
िजनके  नाम से बड़े-बड़े सूरमाओं की रूह  काँपती थी।  महाराजा रणजीत िंसह जी युǉ भूिम मȂ शेर 
की तरह गरजते थे। िसफर् शौयर् ही नहीं, महाराजा रणजीत िंसह जी ने इंसािनयत का पैगाम भी 
दुिनया को िदया है। उनके  शासन मȂ धमर्, जात-पात क े नाम पर कोई भेदभ ाव नहीं था।  बीबीसी 
वÊडर् िहÎटर्ी क े एक सवȃ ने महाराज रणजीत िंसह जी को 'Greatest Leader of All Times' का 
िखताब िदया है।  ऐसे महात्मा को मȅ इस सदन मȂ नमन करता हूँ।   
 मȅ महाराजा रणजीत िंसह जी को याद करते हुए एक अहम माँग करना चाह ता हूँ। लंदन क े 
िवक्टोिरया और अÊबटर् Çयूिजयम मȂ महाराजा रणजीत िंसह जी का सोने का शाही िंसहासन रखा 
हुआ है। मȅ भारत सरकार से यह माँग करता हूँ िक भारत सरकार diplomatic relations क े ज़िरये 
UK सरकार से बात करे और उस िंसहासन को वापस लाने क े िलए Ģयास करे। वह िंसहासन 
वापस हमारे देश मȂ आना चािहए और सबको उसके  दशर्न का मौका िमलना चािहए। महाराजा 
रणजीत िंसह जी क े जीवन से हम सबको Ģेरणा और सीख लेनी चािहए। साथ ही उनके  शौयर्, 
इंसािनयत और राज्
य की नीित को बच्चȗ को िकताबȗ मȂ पढ़ाया जाए, िजससे बच्चȗ को सुशासन 
का असली मतलब पता लग सके । 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Raghav Chadha : Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sant 
Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shri M. Mohame d Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand for establishment of a multi-purpose industrial training centre and Hi-tech 
 Trade Centre with Entertainment Park at North Chennai industrial cluster 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu): Mada m, North Chennai industrial cluster 
comprising Ennore, Tiruvottiyur, Manali, Korattur, Madhavaram, Ambattur, Avadi and 
adjoining District of Tiruvallur make this regio
n a special industrial hub. It houses many 
large petrochemical industries and fertiliz er units, Thermal Power Station (NCTPS) 
Stage I, NTECL, CPCL, TPL, MPL and MFL and more than 6,000 SMEs. This is a 
competitive industrial area where companie s are fighting for skilled manpower. Thus 
the employment potential is high. There is a need for an advanced industrial training 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
153

 
 
centre and trade centre to harness the human resource. The picturesque location 
between Retteri and Madhavaram lakes is excellently suitable for the Integrated 
Industrial training complex. This will he lp hundreds and thousa nds of educated and 
skilled youth for getting hands on training in various industrial trades. This will be great 
boon for skill training and entrepreneurship development as well as promotion of trade 
and commerce. There is a huge potential and scope for creation of water theme park 
and entertainment park which will add advant ages to this North Chennai Industrial 
hub.  
The multi-varied industries at Amba ttur, Madhavaram, Korattur, Manali and 
Ennore will get a much needed facelift and th e overall trade will prosper. Productivity 
will grow. Employment opportunities for youth will be generated in huge numbers. 
Establishing a Multipurpose Industrial Traini ng Centre with Trade Centre will definitely 
facilitate Tamil Nadu in achieving its ta rget of one trillion economy very soon. 
Therefore, I urge the Government to esta blish a multi-purpose industrial training 
centre and Trade Centre to support North Chennai Industrial hub. Thank you.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Shri R. 
Girirajan: Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri mati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Moha med Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha). 
 
Demand for formation of Greater Cooch Behar as a Union Territory 
 
SHRI NAGENDRA RAY (West Bengal): Ma dam, there has been a long pending 
demand of the Greater Cooch Behar People ’s Association since the year 2015 for 
formation of Greater Cooch Behar as a Union Territory by carving it out of the State of 
West Bengal. The Association has made  a number of representations to the 
Government in the past to realize aspiration s of its people. This Association has been 
against merger of the then Cooch Behar wi th the States of West Bengal and Assam 
as they considered it illegal, unconstitutional and against the wishes of the locals.  
For the knowledge of my colleagues here, I would like to mention that the then 
Government was aware of the ground situation that merger of Greater Cooch Behar 
with West Bengal and Assam is very sensitive because of violation of the Instrument of 
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Accession of State of Cooch Behar signed between Maharaja Shri Jagaddipendra 
Narayan Bhup Bahadur and Lord Mountb atten, Governor General, Dominion 
Government of India, on 9th August, 1947  and Agreement Annexure – ‘A’ made on 
28th and 30th August, 1949.  Interestingl y, Cooch Behar was shown as ‘C’ category 
State in the First Schedule of the Constitu tion adopted by Constituent Assembly on 
26th November, 1949.  
Therefore, I would sincerel y request hon. Home Minister to undo the injustice 
done to the people of Cooch Behar by carvi ng out it as a separate Union Territory. 
Thank you.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Nagendra Ray: Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh (Gujarat) and Shri Kesridevsinh 
Jhala (Gujarat). 
 
Demand to increase the One Stop Centres in Odisha 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha): Madam, violence against women persists as a 
distressing issue, demanding urgent and comprehensive solutions. The One Stop 
Centre (OSC) scheme led by the Central Government is commendable but needs 
expansion in Odisha, where the number of centr es is significantly lower than in States 
like Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  
In Odisha, the Government has established Sakhi centres to aid distressed 
women, yet the existing numbers fall sh ort of meeting the extensive demand. 
Expanding One Stop Centres in  Odisha is crucial to ensu re comprehensive coverage 
and assistance for victims of violence. Th rough you, Madam, I respectfully request 
the Government to increase the number of cen tres in Odisha to provide support to 
more women in the State. Thank you so much.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shrimati 
Sulata Deo:  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Subhasish 
Khuntia (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odi sha), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha) and 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).                                  
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee, not present. Shri Muzibulla Khan.   
 
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
155

 
 
Demand to establish more Kendriya Vidalayas and Eklavya Schools in Odisha 
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN (Odisha): Madam, Odisha has been persistently advocating 
for the establishment of Kendriya Vidyalay as in every block across the state. These 
schools are crucial to providing quality education and ensuring educational access for 
students in remote areas. Additionally, there is a pressing demand for Eklavya 
Schools in Scheduled Areas and blocks with  significant tribal populations. These 
specialized schools are essential for addre ssing educational disparities, promoting 
cultural preservation, and fostering socio-economic development among tribal 
communities in Odisha. Their establishment would not only improve educational 
outcomes but also empower marginalized gr oups by providing them with equitable 
opportunities for growth and development.  I request the Government to take possible 
steps in this.  Thank you, Madam.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special  Mention made by hon. Member, Shri 
Muzibulla Khan: Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) and Shri Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha).          
            
Demand for effective flood management works in India 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): महोदया, अिनिÌचत और लंबे मानसून क े मौसम क े कारण भारत 
बाढ़ क े Ģित काफी संवेदनशील है। यह महत्वपूणर् है िक भारत जान-माल क े नुकसान को रोकने क े 
िलए एक मजबूत बाढ़ आपदा Ģबंधन Ģणाली (Flood Di
saster Management System) 
िवकिसत करे। उǄराखंड, उǄर Ģदेश, िबहार, असम, पिÌचम बंगाल, क ेरल और ओिडशा भारत 
क े सबसे बुरी तरह बाढ़ Ģभािवत राज्यȗ मȂ से क ु छ हȅ। हर मानसून मȂ बाढ़ की पुनरावृिǄ से 
जान-माल का भारी नुकस
ान होता है। बाढ़ िनयंतर्ण क े िलए वनीकरण, ढलान क े Ģवाह को रोकने 
क े िलए छत की ढलान, बांधȗ का िनमार्ण और मानव बिÎतयȗ मȂ पानी आने से रोकने क े िलए 
तटबंध, Äलड पर्ूिंफग और बाढ़ क े मैदानȗ क े ज़ोिंनग पर अिधक जोर िदया जाना चा
िहए। 
वृक्षारोपण और वनÎपित क े रोपण से िमƺी को अितिरƪ पानी को बनाए रखने और अवशोिषत 
करने मȂ मदद िमलेगी और इस Ģिकर्या से बाढ़ मȂ कमी आएगी। बाढ़ Ģभािव त क्षेतर्ȗ से सूखे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
अितिरƪ पानी को चैनलाइज करने क े िलए नहरȗ तथा फीडर नेटवकर् का िनमार्ण और वैज्ञािनक 
ढंग से जलाशयȗ और बांधȗ का िनमार्ण करना चा िहए , िजनका उपयोग बाढ़ क े दौरान अितिरƪ 
पानी को जमा करने क े िलए िकया जाए। बाढ़ से िनपटने क े िलए एक माÎटर Ãलान चािहए जो 
िकसी िवशेष क्षेतर् की जरूरतȗ क े िलए िविशÍट होना चािहए। यिद इन कदमȗ को ठीक से लागू 
िकया जाता है तो यह बाढ़ राहत, पूवार्नुमान आिद पर आवतीर् Ëयय को कम कर सकता है।  देश मȂ 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
बाढ़ क े Ģकोप से मानव जीवन, भूिम और संपिǄ की रक्षा क े िलए Ģभावी बाढ़ Ģबंधन कायर् की 
आवÌयकता है।                                                                                 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by hon. Member, Shri Naresh 
Bansal: Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).                                                                          
 
Need to address the issues faced by Agricultural Workers 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Madam, agri cultural and rural workers of India 
constitute the most deprived and marginalized classes in our society. They are 
suffering from low wages, lack of social  security, lack of proper health care, 
malnutrition and lack of educational opportunities for their children. The agricultural 
workers, who are unable to work due to old age, are left with no support from the 
Government. Sir, there is a need to ensure  that agricultural workers get a monthly 
pension of minimum 5000/- rupees and the funds for this money should be 
transferred to the States by the Union Gove rnment. There is a need to ensure that 
universal and free quality healthcare is provided to the agricultural workers. As per the 
NCRB data, the suicides among farm labo urers is increasing and this shows the 
increase in rural distress. The report showed that in 2021, 5,563 farm labourers have 
committed suicide. This number has increased to  6,083 in 2022. This is the result of 
low wages and lack of employment opportunities for the rural poor. There is an urgent 
need to increase the amount allocated for employment guarantee schemes and 
strengthen social security.  
I urge the Government to take steps to ensure that the right to a dignified life of 
the agricultural workers is protected. Thank you, Madam.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. M
embers 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Dr. V. 
Sivadasan: Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  
Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri R. Girira jan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Na du), Shri P.P. Suneer (Kerala), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).                                                                  
Now, hon. Member Shri Brijlal. 
   
[ 24 July, 2024 ]
157

 
 
Concern over high level of pollution in rivers flowing through Bagpat, Uttar Pradesh 
 
 SHRI BRIJLAL (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, the st atus of the "Cancer River" in Bagpat, 
Uttar Pradesh, remains dire. The Krishna, Kali, and Hindon rivers, which flow through 
this region, are heavily contaminated with industrial pollutants, including heavy metals 
like mercury and lead. This pollution has severely impacted the health of local 
residents, leading to high rates of cancer, bone deformities, and other serious 
illnesses.  Efforts by the National Green Tr ibunal (NGT) have highlighted the failure to 
address these issues effectiv ely. Despite orders to provide clean drinking water and 
improve health monitoring, little progress has been made. Many residents continue to 
rely on contaminated water for daily use causing health problems. This has resulted in 
untimely death and a large number of other a ilments. This problem has been there for 
over two decades and everyo ne has been highlighting th e dangerous effects on the 
lives of residents and farmers of this area but little has been achieved. I earnestly urge 
the Central and State bodies involved in this  area to make efforts to eradicate this 
problem by making war level efforts and save the lives of residents and the future 
generations. I also urge for a time-bound  action on the issue as this problem is 
increasing despite making best efforts.  Thank you, Madam. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. KAVITA PA TIDAR): The following hon. Member 
associated himself with the Special Mentio n made by hon. Member, Shri Brijlal: Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha).   
 
The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25
th July, 
2024.  
 
The House then adjourned at thirty-eight minutes past six of the clock 
 till eleven of the clock on Thursday, the 25th July, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 