Vol. 265    Monday, 
No. 1 22nd July, 2024 
     31 Ashadha, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION)  
(PART-II)  
CONTENTS 
National Anthem (page 1) 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1- 2) 
Obituary References (pages 2 - 3) 
Opening Remarks by the Chairman (pages 3 -4) 
Resignation by Member (page 4) 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons (page 4) 
Motion for Election to the Rajghat Samadhi Committee (RSC) - Adopted 
 (pages 4 - 5) 
Regarding matters related to various rules and other issues (pages 5 -12) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Matters raised with Permission- 
Concern over the rising cases of dubious drug trials having serious 
 repercussions on the health care s ector in the country (pages 12 - 14) 
Concern over mis-management of Railway s in Kerala causing distress to the 
railway workers/passengers in the region (pages 14 - 15) 
Demand to explore possibilities for new rail  projects in Auraiya district of Uttar 
Pradesh (pages 15 - 16)  
Concern over increasing numbers of Digi tal Banking Frauds in the Financial 
 Year  2023-24 (pages 16 -17)   
Concern over death of three labourers wh ile working in illegal coal mine (Carbo 
Cell) in Surendra Nagar district of Gujarat (pages 17 -18) 
Demand to allocate funds for pending pub lic projects in the State of Tamil Nadu 
(pages 18 - 20) 
Demand for Special category status to the State of Odisha (pages 20 - 21) 
Demand to implement a comprehensive National Coastal Tourism Development 
Policy in the country (pages 21 - 22) 
Demand for long-term solution to prevent loss of life and property due to floods in 
Bihar (pages 22 - 23) 
Demand to include the history of the struggle against emergency, in school 
 and college curriculum (pages 23 - 24) 
Demand for allocation of Special Economic Zones in the state of Bihar 
(pages 24 - 25) 
Concern over effects of Global warming in the country (pages 25 - 26) 
Oral answers to Questions (pages 26 - 64) 
Papers Lai
d on the Table (pages 64 - 65) 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and  Hind i) are 
available as Part-I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 

Special Mentions-  
Need for an Indigenized English proficiency test (pages 65 -66) 
Demand for setting up AIIMS in Kozhikode, Kerala (pages 66 -67) 
Concern over exponential increase in air fares being charged by the airline 
companies (pages 67 - 68) 
Demand to approve Unchahar-Amethi rail line project (page 68) 
Concern over rail infrastructure and services in Kannur (page 69) 
Demand to change the name of Kerala to Keralam (pages 69 - 70) 
Concern over delay in completion of National Highway Projects and its poor 
maintenance in Odisha (pages 70 - 71) 
Need to expedite track-doubling project  in the Villupuram-Thanjavur mainline 
section of Southern Railway (page 71) 
Extension of defence corridor of Chitrak oot-Jhansi, Kanpur and Lucknow up to 
Etawah and Auraiya districts (page 72) 
Demand of measures for the welfare of duck farmers (pages 72 - 73) 
Demand for Banking Licence for the Dist rict Central Co-operative Bank in 
Namakkal District, Tamil Nadu (pages 73 - 74) 
Demand to approve the Thanjavur- Pudukkottai-Madurai railway line 
(pages 74 - 75) 
Demand to stop cultivation of paddy in Punjab (page 75) 
Demand for establishing a single window clearance system for doctors looking to 
start hospital (pages 75- 76) 
Demand to increase the number of general class coaches in trains (page 76)    
Withdrawal of 18 percent GST on Kendu leaf for the welfare of tribal communities in 
Odisha (pages 76 -77) 
Concern over recent hike in Mobile tariff plans (pages 77 - 78) 
Demand for legislation on Population control in India (pages 78 - 79) 
Demand to introduce Tejas coaches in Howrah and Sealdah Rajdhani Express 
trains (page 79) 
Repatriation of smuggled stolen Indian antiquities from foreign countries 
(pages 79 -80) 

RAJYA SABHA 
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF MEMBERS 
A 
Abdul Wahab, Shri (Kerala) 
Abdulla, Shri M. Mohamed (Tamil Nadu) 
Agrawal, Dr. Radha Mohan Das (Uttar Pradesh) 
Ahmad, Dr. Faiyaz (Bihar) 
Ahmad, Dr. Sarfraz (Jharkhand) 
Ali, Shri Gulam (Nominated) 
Alla, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy (Andhra Pradesh) 
Amin, Shri Narhari (Gujarat) 
Arora, Shri Sanjeev (Punjab) 
Athawale, Shri Ramdas (Maharashtra) 
B 
Baburao, Shri Golla (Andhra Pradesh) 
Bachchan, Shrimati Jaya Amitabh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Baishya, Shri Birendra Prasad (Assam) 
Bajpayee, Dr. Laxmikant (Uttar Pradesh) 
Bakshi, Shri Subrata (West Bengal) 
Balmik, Shrimati Sumitra (Madhya Pradesh) 
Bansal, Shri Naresh (Uttarakhand) 
Bara, Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai (Gujarat) 
Baraik, Shri Prakash Chik (West Bengal) 
Bhandage, Shri Narayanasa K. (Karnataka) 
Bhatt, Shri Mahendra (Uttarakhand) 
Bhattacharya, Shri Samik (West Bengal) 
Bhattacharyya, Shri Bikash Ranjan (West Bengal) 
Bhuyan, Shri Ajit Kumar (Assam) 
Bishi, Shri Niranjan (Odisha) 
Bonde, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao (Maharashtra) 
Brij Lal, Shri (Uttar Pradesh) 

Brittas, Dr. John (Kerala) 
C 
Chadha, Shri Raghav (Punjab) 
Chander, Shri Subhash (Haryana) 
Chandrasegharan, Shri N. (Tamil Nadu) 
Chandrashekhar, Shri G.C. (Karnataka) 
Chaturvedi, Shrimati Priyanka (Maharashtra) 
Chaudhary, Shri Jayant (Uttar Pradesh) 
Chavan, Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao (Maharashtra) 
Chidambaram, Shri P. (Tamil Nadu) 
Chowdhury, Shrimati Renuka (Telangana) 
D 
Dangi, Shri Neeraj (Rajasthan) 
Deo, Shrimati Sulata (Odisha) 
Deora, Shri Milind Murli (Maharashtra) 
Desai, Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai (Gujarat) 
Dev, Ms. Sushmita (West Bengal) 
Devegowda, Shri H.D. (Karnataka) 
Dharmar, Shri R. (Tamil Nadu) 
Dholakia, Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai (Gujarat) 
Divakonda, Shri Damodar Rao (Telangana) 
Dubey, Shri Satish Chandra (Bihar) 
Dwivedi, Shrimati Seema (Uttar Pradesh) 
E 
Elango, Shri N.R. (Tamil Nadu) 
G 
Gandhi, Shrimati Sonia (Rajasthan) 
(ii)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Garasiya, Shri Chunnilal (Rajasthan) 
Geeta alias Chandraprabha, Shrimati (Uttar Pradesh) 
Gehlot, Shri Rajendra (Rajasthan) 
Ghose, Shrimati Sagarika (West Bengal) 
Girirajan, Shri R. (Tamil Nadu)  
Gogoi, Shri Ranjan (Nominated)  
Gohil, Shri Shaktisinh (Gujarat) 
Gokhale, Shri Saket (West Bengal) 
Gopchade, Shri Ajeet Madhavrao (Maharashtra)  
Goswami, Ms. Indu Bala (Himachal Pradesh) 
Gupta, Shri Narain Dass (National Capital Territory of Delhi) 
Gupta, Shri Prem Chand (Bihar) 
Gupta, Shrimati Dharmshila (Bihar) 
Gurjar, Shri Banshilal (Madhya Pradesh) 
H 
Handore, Shri Chandrakant (Maharashtra) 
Haque, Shri Mohammed Nadimul (West Bengal) 
Harivansh, Shri (Bihar) 
Heggade, Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra (Nominated) 
Hussain, Dr. Syed Naseer (Karnataka) 
I 
Ilaiyaraaja, Shri (Nominated) 
Islam, Shri Samirul (West Bengal) 
J 
Jaggesh, Shri (Karnataka) 
Jain, Shri Naveen (Uttar Pradesh) 
Jaishankar, Shri S. (Gujarat) 
Jangra, Shri Ram Chander (Haryana) 
Jethmalani, Shri Mahesh (Nominated) 
Jha, Shri Manoj Kumar (Bihar) 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(iii)

Jha, Shri Sanjay Kumar (Bihar) 
Jhala, Shri Kesridevsinh (Gujarat) 
K 
Kadadi, Shri Iranna (Karnataka) 
Kalita, Shri Bhubaneswar (Assam) 
Kalyanasundaram, Shri S. (Tamil Nadu) 
Karad, Dr. Bhagwat (Maharashtra) 
Kareem, Shri Elamaram (Kerala) 
Khan, Dr. Fauzia (Maharashtra) 
Khan, Shri Javed Ali (Uttar Pradesh) 
Khan, Shri Muzibulla (Odisha) 
Kharge, Shri Mallikarjun (Karnataka) 
Kharlukhi, Dr. Wanweiroy (Meghalaya) 
Khuntia, Shri Subhasish (Odisha) 
Konyak, Shrimati S. Phangnon (Nagaland) 
Koragappa, Shri Narayana (Karnataka) 
Krishnaiah, Shri Ryaga (Andhra Pradesh) 
Kulkarni, Shrimati Medha Vishram (Maharashtra) 
Kumar, Dr. Sikander (Himachal Pradesh) 
Kumar, Shri Mithlesh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Kumar, Shri Sujeet (Odisha) 
L 
Laxman, Dr. K. (Uttar Pradesh) 
Leishemba, Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba (Manipur) 
Lepcha, Shri Dorjee Tshering (Sikkim) 
M 
Mahadik, Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao (Maharashtra) 
Mahajan, Shri Harsh (Himachal Pradesh) 
Mahto, Shri Khiru (Bihar) 
Maji, Shrimati Mahua (Jharkhand) 
(iv)
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Makan, Shri Ajay (Karnataka) 
Maliwal, Ms. Swati (National Capital Territory of Delhi) 
Mandadi, Shri Anil Kumar Yadav (Telangana) 
Mangaraj, Shri Manas Ranjan (Odisha) 
Mani, Shri Jose K. (Kerala) 
Mansingh, Dr. Sonal (Nominated) 
Margherita, Shri Pabitra (Assam) 
Mather Hisham, Shrimati Jebi (Kerala) 
Maurya, Shri Amar Pal (Uttar Pradesh) 
Mittal, Dr. Ashok Kumar (Punjab) 
Mohanta, Shrimati Mamata (Odisha) 
Mokariya, Shri Rambhai Harjibhai (Gujarat) 
Mopidevi, Shri Venkataramana Rao (Andhra Pradesh) 
Murty, Shrimati Sudha (Nominated) 
Murugan, Dr. L. (Madhya Pradesh) 
 
N 
 
Nadda, Shri Jagat Prakash (Gujarat) 
Nagar, Shri Surendra Singh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Naroliya, Shrimati Maya (Madhya Pradesh) 
Narzary, Shri Rwngwra (Assam) 
Nathwani, Shri Parimal (Andhra Pradesh) 
Nayak, Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai (Gujarat) 
Netam, Shrimati Phulo Devi (Chhattisgarh) 
Nirmala Sitharaman, Shrimati (Karnataka) 
Nishad, Shri Baburam (Uttar Pradesh) 
Noor, Shrimati Mausam (West Bengal) 
 
O 
 
O' Brien, Shri Derek (West Bengal) 
 
 
[ 3 July, 2024 ]
(v)

 
 
P 
 
P, Shri Sandosh Kumar (Kerala) 
Panwar, Shri Krishan Lal (Haryana) 
Patel, Shri Praful (Maharashtra) 
Patel, Shri Shambhu Sharan (Bihar) 
Pathak, Shri Sandeep Kumar (Punjab) 
Patidar, Ms. Kavita (Madhya Pradesh) 
Patil, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao (Maharashtra) 
Patra, Dr. Sasmit (Odisha) 
Pawar, Shri Sharad (Maharashtra) 
Pawar, Shrimati Sunetra Ajit (Maharashtra) 
Pilli, Shri Subhas Chandra Bose (Andhra Pradesh) 
Prakash, Shri Deepak (Jharkhand) 
Prasad, Shri Aditya (Jharkhand) 
Prasad, Shri V. Vijayendra (Nominated) 
Pratapgarhi, Shri Imran (Maharashtra) 
Puri, Shri Hardeep Singh (Uttar Pradesh) 
 
R 
 
Rahim, Shri A. A. (Kerala) 
Rajeshkumar, Shri K.R.N. (Tamil Nadu) 
Ram Shakal, Shri (Nominated) 
Ramadoss, Dr. Anbumani (Tamil Nadu) 
Ramesh, Shri Jairam (Karnataka) 
Ramji, Shri (Uttar Pradesh) 
Ranjan, Shrimati Ranjeet (Chhattisgarh) 
Rathore, Shri Madan (Rajasthan) 
Raut, Shri Sanjay (Maharashtra) 
Ray, Shri Nagendra (West Bengal) 
Ray, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar (West Bengal) 
Rebia, Shri Nabam (Arunachal Pradesh) 
Reddy, Shri B. Parthasaradhi (Telangana) 
Reddy, Shri K.R. Suresh (Telangana) 
Reddy, Shri Meda Raghunadha (Andhra Pradesh) 
Reddy, Shri S Niranjan (Andhra Pradesh) 
Reddy, Shri V. Vijayasai (Andhra Pradesh) 
(vi)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Reddy, Shri Yerram Venkata Subba (Andhra Pradesh) 
S 
Sahney, Shri Vikramjit Singh (Punjab) 
Saini, Dr. Kalpana (Uttarakhand) 
Salamsinh, Dr. Parmar Jasvantsinh (Gujarat) 
Samantaray, Shri Debashish (Odisha) 
Sandhu, Shri Satnam Singh (Nominated) 
Selvaganabathy, Shri S. (Puducherry) 
Selvarasu, Shri Anthiyur P. (Tamil Nadu) 
Sen, Ms. Dola (West Bengal) 
Seth, Shri Sanjay (Uttar Pradesh) 
Shanmugam, Shri C. Ve. (Tamil Nadu) 
Shanmugam, Shri M. (Tamil Nadu) 
Sharma, Dr. Dinesh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Sharma, Shri Kartikeya (Haryana) 
Shekhar, Shri Neeraj (Uttar Pradesh) 
Shukla, Shri Rajeev (Chhattisgarh) 
Sibal, Shri Kapil (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Dr. Bhim (Bihar) 
Singh, Shri A. D. (Bihar) 
Singh, Shri Akhilesh Prasad (Bihar) 
Singh, Shri Arun (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Ashok (Madhya Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Devendra Pratap (Chhattisgarh) 
Singh, Shri Digvijaya (Madhya Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Harbhajan (Punjab) 
Singh, Shri Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Sanjay (National Capital Territory of Delhi) 
Singh, Shri Sant Balbir (Punjab) 
Singh, Shri Tejveer (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shrimati Darshana (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shrimati Sadhna (Uttar Pradesh) 
Sinha, Shri Rakesh (Nominated) 
Sircar, Shri Jawhar (West Bengal) 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(vii)

Siroya, Shri Lahar Singh (Karnataka) 
Siva, Shri Tiruchi (Tamil Nadu) 
Sivadasan, Dr. V. (Kerala) 
Shrimati Sangeeta (Uttar Pradesh) 
Solanki, Dr. Sumer Singh (Madhya Pradesh) 
Somu, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN (Tamil Nadu) 
Soren, Shri Shibu (Jharkhand) 
Suman, Shri Ramji Lal (Uttar Pradesh) 
Surjewala, Shri Randeep Singh (Rajasthan) 
T 
Tanavade, Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet (Goa) 
Tankha, Shri Vivek K. (Madhya Pradesh) 
Thakur, Shri Ram Nath (Bihar) 
Thakur, Shrimati Mamata (West Bengal) 
Thambidurai, Dr. M. (Tamil Nadu) 
Tiwari, Shri Ghanshyam (Rajasthan) 
Tiwari, Shri Pramod (Rajasthan) 
Trivedi, Shri Sudhanshu (Uttar Pradesh) 
Tulsi, Shri K.T.S. (Chhattisgarh) 
U 
Umeshnath, Shri Balyogi (Madhya Pradesh) 
Usha, Shrimati P. T. (Nominated) 
V 
Vaddiraju, Shri Ravi Chandra (Telangana) 
Vaiko, Shri (Tamil Nadu) 
Vaishnaw, Shri Ashwini (Odisha) 
Vanlalvena, Shri K. (Mizoram) 
Varma, Shri Pradip Kumar (Jharkhand) 
Vasan, Shri G.K. (Tamil Nadu) 
(viii)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Verma, Shri B.L. (Uttar Pradesh) 
Viswam, Shri Binoy (Kerala) 
W 
Wasnik, Shri Mukul Balkrishna (Rajasthan) 
Wilson, Shri P. (Tamil Nadu) 
Y 
Yadav, Prof. Ram Gopal (Uttar Pradesh) 
Yadav, Shri Beedha Masthan Rao (Andhra Pradesh) 
Yadav, Shri Sanjay (Bihar) 
Yadav, Shrimati Sangeeta (Uttar Pradesh) 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(ix)

RAJYA SABHA 
THE CHAIRMAN 
Shri Jagdeep Dhankhar  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN 
Shri Harivansh 
PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
1. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak
2. Ms. Kavita Patidar
3. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu
4. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni
5. Dr. Bhagwat Karad
6. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
7. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla
8. Shri Subhasish Khuntia
SECRETARY-GENERAL 
Shri P. C. Mody 
(x)
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
STANDING COMMITTEES 
 
Business Advisory Committee 
 
Hon'ble Chairman — Chairman  
 
Shri Harivansh 
Shri Bhupender Yadav 
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
Shri Prakash Javadekar 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
 
Committee on Ethics 
 
Shri Prakash Javadekar — Chairman  
 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
Shri Tiruchi Siva 
Shri Sanjay Singh 
Dr. Sasmit Patra 
Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
Shri Elamaram Kareem 
Shrimati Jaya Bachchan 
Shrimati P.T. Usha 
 
General Purposes Committee 
 
 Hon'ble Chairman — Chairman  
 
Shri Harivansh 
Shri Tiruchi Siva  
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(xi)

Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah  
Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
Shri Elamaram Kareem  
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur  
Committee on Government Assurances 
Dr. M. Thambidurai— Chairman 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
Shri Gulam Ali 
House Committee 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh— Chairman 
Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar 
Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
Shri Pabitra Margherita 
Ms. Dola Sen 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh To
mar 
Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav 
Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
(xii)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Committee on Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
Shri Harivansh — Chairman  
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee  
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam  
Shrimati Mausam Noor  
Shri P. Wilson 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
Shrimati Sulata Deo  
Shri Masthan Rao Beeda  
Shri R. Dharmar  
Shri G.K. Vasan  
Shri Praful Patel  
Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
Committee on Papers Laid on the Table 
Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
Shri Anil Desai 
Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde 
Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
Shri Deepak Prakash 
Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan 
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
Shri Abdul Wahab 
Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
Committee on Petitions 
Shri Sujeet Kumar— Chairman  
Shrimati Sumitra Balmik 
Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(xiii)

Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
Shri Nabam Rebia 
Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
Shri Arun Singh 
Shri Tiruchi Siva 
Committee of Privileges 
Shri Harivansh — Chairman  
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Elamaram Kareem 
Shri Kumar Ketkar 
Ms. Saroj Pandey 
Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
Shri Rakesh Sinha 
Shri G.K. Vasan 
Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
Committee on Information and Communication Technology 
 Management in Rajya Sabha 
Shri Narain Dass Gupta — Chairman  
Shri Rakesh Sinha  
Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
Shri R. Girirajan 
Shri Muzibulla Khan 
Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi  
Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy  
Dr. John Brittas 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur  
Committee on Rules 
Hon'ble Chairman — Chairman  
(xiv)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Shri Harivansh 
Shri Anil Baluni 
Shri N.R. Elango 
Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
Dr. K. Laxman 
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
Shrimati Mamata Mohanta 
Shri Parimal Nathwani 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
Shri Bhupender Yadav 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
 Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee — Chairman  
Shri Raghav Chadha 
Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
Shri R. Dharmar 
Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
Shri S Niranjan Reddy 
Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
Shri K. T. S. Tulsi 
Dr. Santanu Sen 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(xv)

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Cabinet Ministers 
 
Shri Narendra Modi The Prime Minister and also in-charge of the 
following Ministries/Departments:- 
i) The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and  Pensions; 
ii) The Department of Atomic Energy; 
iii) The Department of Space; 
All important policy issues; and 
All other portfolios not allocated to any Minister 
Shri Raj Nath Singh The Minister of Defence 
Shri Amit Shah The Minister of Home Affairs; and 
The Minister of Cooperation 
Shri Nitin Jairam Gadkari The Minister of Road Transport and Highways 
Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda The Minister of Health and Family Welfare; and 
The Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan The Minister of Agriculture and Farmers  
Welfare; and  
The Minister of Rural Development 
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman The Minister of Finance; and 
The Minister of Corporate Affairs 
Shri S. Jaishankar 
 
The Minister of External Affairs 
Shri Manohar Lal The Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs; and  
The Minister of Power 
Shri H. D. Kumaraswamy The Minister of Heavy Industries; and  
The Minister of Steel 
Shri Piyush Goyal The Minister of Commerce and Industry 
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan The Minister of Education 
Shri Jitan Ram Manjhi The Minister of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(xvi)

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias 
Lalan Singh 
The Minister of Panchayati Raj; and  
The Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and  
Dairying 
Shri Sarbananda Sonowal The Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
Dr. Virendra Kumar The Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu The Minister of Civil Aviation 
Shri Pralhad Joshi The Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution; and  
The Minister of New and Renewable Energy 
Shri Jual Oram 
The Minister of Tribal Affairs 
Shri Giriraj Singh The Minister of Textiles 
Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw The Minister of Railways;  
The Minister of Information and Broadcasting; and  
The Minister of Electronics and Information 
Technology 
Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
The Minister of Communications; and  
The Minister of Development of North Eastern 
Region 
Shri Bhupender Yadav The Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change 
Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat The Minister of Culture; and  
The Minister of Tourism 
Shrimati Annpurna Devi The Minister of Women and Child Development 
Shri Kiren Rijiju The Minister of Parliamentary Affairs; and  
The Minister of Minority Affairs 
Shri Hardeep Singh Puri The Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(xvii)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya The Minister of Labour and Employment; and 
The Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports 
Shri G. Kishan Reddy The Minister of Coal; and   
The Minister of Mines 
Shri Chirag Paswan The Minister of Food Processing Industries 
Shri C R Patil The Minister of Jal Shakti 
Ministers of State (Independent Charge) 
Rao Inderjit Singh The Minister of State of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation;  
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Planning; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Culture 
Dr. Jitendra Singh 
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Science and Technology;  
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Earth Sciences; 
The Minister of State in the Prime Minister's Office; 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions; 
The Minister of State in the Department of Atomic Energy; and  
The Minister of State in the Department of Space 
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Law and Justice; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
Shri Jadhav Pratprao 
Ganpatrao 
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Ayush; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare 
Shri Jayant Chaudhary The Minister of State of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Education 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(xviii)

Ministers of State 
Shri Jitin Prasada The Minister of State in the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology 
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Power; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy 
Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
Shri Krishan Pal The Minister of State in the Ministry of Cooperation 
Shri Ramdas Athawale The Minister of State in the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur The Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare 
Shri Nityanand Rai The Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shrimati Anupriya Patel The Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Shri V. Somanna 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Jal Shakti; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Railways 
Dr. Chandra Sekhar 
Pemmasani 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Rural Development; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Communications 
Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel The Minister of State in the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal
Husbandry and Dairying; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
Sushri Shobha Karandlaje 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
(xix)
[RAJYA SABHA]

Shri Kirtivardhan Singh The Minister of State in the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs 
Shri B. L. Verma The Minister of State in the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment 
Shri Shantanu Thakur 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and
Waterways 
Shri Suresh Gopi The Minister of State in the Mi nistry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism 
Dr. L. Murugan 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
Shri Ajay Tamta The Minister of State in the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways 
Shri Bandi Sanjay Kumar The Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri Kamlesh Paswan The Minister of State in the Ministry of Rural Development 
Shri Bhagirath Choudhary The Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey The Minister of State in the Ministry of Coal; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Mines 
Shri Sanjay Seth The Minister of State in the Ministry of Defence 
Shri Ravneet Singh The Minister of State in the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Railways 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
(xx)

Shri Durgadas Uikey The Minister of State in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
Shrimati Raksha Nikhil 
Khadse 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
Shri Sukanta Majumdar The Minister of State in the Ministry of Education; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Development of North
Eastern Region 
Shrimati Savitri Thakur The Minister of State in the Ministry of Women and Child
Development 
Shri Tokhan Sahu The Minister of State in the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs 
Shri Raj Bhushan 
Choudhary 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
Shri Bhupathi Raju  
Srinivasa Varma 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Heavy Industries; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Steel 
Shri Harsh Malhotra The Minister of State in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways 
Shrimati Nimuben 
Jayantibhai Bambhaniya 
The Minister of State in the Mi nistry of Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution 
Shri Murlidhar Mohol The Minister of State in the Ministry of Cooperation; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
Shri George Kurian The Minister of State in the Ministry of Minority Affairs; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal
Husbandry and Dairying 
Shri Pabitra Margherita The Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Textiles 
(xxi)
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
IN THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY FIFTH SESSION OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
Commencing on the 22nd July, 2024 / 31 Ashadha, 1946 (Saka) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 22nd July, 2024 / 31 Ashadha, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 (The National Anthem, 'Jana Gana Mana', was played) 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, I take this opport unity to extend warm birthday 
greetings to the hon. Leader of the Opposi tion and President of the Indian National 
Congress, Shri Mallik
arjun Kharge, whose birthday was yesterday, 21st July.    
Shri Kharge, a senior politician in the country, has served in various 
constitutional positions, including as Un ion Cabinet Minister, Member of Lok Sabha 
for two terms, Minister in the Karnataka Government and Leader of Opposition of 
Karnataka Legislative Assembly.  He had been a Member of Karnataka Legislative 
Assembly for nine consecutive terms from 1 972 to 2009.  He has been an influential 
labour union leader passionately advocating cause of workers. 
Shri Kharge is a remarkable polyglot, which enriches his engagement with 
diverse communities. His interest in sports , including kabaddi, hockey, and football, 
further exemplifies his dynamic personality.  This House has often been delighted by 
his wit and humour which effortlessly lighten the atmosphere. He is married to 
Shrimati Radhabai Kharge.  The couple is  blessed with sons, Priyank, who is a 
Cabinet Minister in the Government of Ka rnataka, Rahul and Milind, and daughters, 
Priyadarshini, and Dr. Jayashree, who is married to Shri Radhakrishna, Member of 
Parliament, Lok Sabha.  On behalf of the entire House, I wish him a very happy and 
healthy life.   
Hon. Members, I am pleased to extend birthday greetings to hon. Member of 
Parliament, Shri S. Niranjan Reddy .  His birthday is today.  A senior advocate in the 
Supreme Court of India, he has served as the standing counsel for both the Election 
Commission of India and the Medical Council of India. Shri Niranjan Reddy has been a 
Member of this House representing the State of Andhra Pradesh since June 2022. Mr. 
Reddy’s reflections in this House, especial ly on the three new laws pertaining to 
criminal jurisprudence, 75 years of our Parliamentary journey and also on the 
Telecommunication Bill have been enormously beneficial to this House.  

 
 Mr. Reddy has impactfully represented In dia as part of India’s Parliamentary 
delegation to the World Summit of the Committee of the Future in Uruguay, 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Ghana and in the Inter-Parliamentary 
Union in Geneva. An avid film lover, Shri Niranjan Reddy is credited with the 
screenplay for 'Ghazi' (2017), which won th e National Film Award for Best Feature 
Film in Telugu. His passion also extends to  conservation of art through his trust, 
Art@Telangana. He is married to Shrimati Vaidehi Reddy Sirgapoor and the couple is 
blessed with son, Sahil, and daughter, Akshara.  
On behalf of this House,  I wish him a long, healthy and happy life and extend 
greetings to his family members. 
 
 
OBITUARY REFERENCES 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I refer with profound sorrow to the passing away of 
Shri P. Kannan , a former Member of this House on the 5 th of November, 2023.  He 
served as a Member of this House repres enting the Union Territory of Puducherry 
from October 2009 to October 2015.   
 Born on 20
th August, 1949 at Puducherry, Shri P. Kannan, entered public life at 
a very young age and rose to become a Me mber of Puducherry Legislative Assembly 
for three terms (1985 to 1996).  He al so served as the Sp eaker of Puducherry 
Legislative Assembly (1991 to 1996) and a Mi nister in the Government of Puducherry 
holding portfolio of Health and Family Welfare.  
 In the passing away of Shri P. Kannan,  the country has lost one of the tallest 
leaders of Puducherry, an ex perienced legislator and an able administrator.  We 
deeply mourn the passing away of Shri P. Kannan. 
 Hon. Members, I refer with profound  sorrow to the passing away of hon. 
General Secretary of the Central Committ ee of the Communist Party of Vietnam, His 
Excellency Nguyen Phu Trong , on 19
th July, 2024 in Hanoi at the age of 80 years.  
General Secretary Nguyen Phu Trong was the senior-most Vietnamese political leader 
holding that position for the last 13 year s and was widely respected in Vietnam. He 
has served as the Chairman of the National  Assembly of the Socialist Republic of 
Vietnam and numerous senior political positions in the country. 
Apart from his wise leadership of Vi etnam’s progress and development over 
decades, General Secretary Nguyen Phu Tr ong had contributed to India-Vietnam 
friendship and to the comprehensive strategic partnership between the two countries. 
He came to India in 2013 on a state visit.  
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 We express our deepest condolences to  the people and leadership of the 
Socialist Republic of Vietnam on the pa ssing away of General Secretary, His 
Excellency Mr. Nguyen Phu Tr ong. We send our deepest sympathy to his bereaved 
family and to the people of Vietnam. We also express our solidar ity with the people 
and leaders of Vietnam in this time of grief. 
 I request Members to rise in their pl aces and observe sile nce as a mark of 
respect to the memory of the departed. 
 
(Hon. Members then stood in silence for one minute) 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  Secretary-General will convey to  the members of the bereaved 
family our sense of profound sorrow and deep sympathy. 
 
 
OPENING REMARKS BY THE CHAIRMAN 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this Session, the 265th Session of Rajya 
Sabha, marks a significant moment with th e consideration of the maiden Budget by 
the newly elected Government now serving its third consecutive term after over six 
decades under Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi.  
 Hon. Members, I am confident that this  august House will expectedly lead the 
nation by example to calibrate the political  path forward marked by moderation of 
discourse, pledging to serve the nation  and rising above partisan interests. 
Undeniably, there is need to lower the te mperature in our polit y. This House must 
reflect highest standards of sanctity, propriety and protocol of parliamentary traditions 
that would be motivational for legislatures  in the largest democracy and outside as 
well.  World is looking up to us.  Let us live up to that expectation.   
 Hon. Members, I have every hope that  the proceedings of the House would be 
marked by enriching and informed debates optimally utilizing the time for national 
benefit. Let us uphold the principles of  'Dialogue, Discussion, Deliberation and 
Debate' fostering an environment conduciv e to robust parliamentary discourse and 
set an example before the nation.   
 Hon. Members, I seek to draw your attention to another important and 
concerning aspect.  Many a time, Member s' communications to the Chairman find 
way in public domain and sometimes even before the same reac hes the addressee.  
This inappropriate practice of garnering public attention is at best avoided.   
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
3

Hon. Members, there is nothing beyond  Bharat which we cannot achieve.  Let 
us dedicate to ever keep nation
 first relegating partisan in terests.  There is no better 
place than this temple of democracy to begin. Let us all commit to act in togetherness 
for welfare of our people.   
RESIGNATION BY MEMBER 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I hav
e to inform Members that I had received a letter, dated the 4th 
of July, 2024, from Dr. K. Keshava Rao, Member, representing the State of 
Telangana, resigning his seat in the Rajya Sabha. I have accepted his resignation with 
effect from 5th July, 2024. 
 PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I have to inform Members that the Panel of Vice-
Chairpersons has been reconstitu
ted with the following Members.    
1. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak
2. Ms. Kavita Patidar
3. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu
4. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni
5. Dr. Bhagwat Karad
6. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
7. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla
8. Shri Subhasish Khuntia
       We continue to give fifty per cent representation to our lady Members.   
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE RAJGHAT SAMADHI
 COMMITTEE (RSC) 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ी  ( Ǜी मनोहर लाल) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत ĢÎताव उपिÎथत 
करता हूं : 
 " िक राजघाट समािध अिधिनयम, 1951 (1951 का 41) की  धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) क े 
साथ पिठत धारा 4 की  उपधारा (1) क े खंड (घ) क े अनुसरण मȂ, यह सभा उस रीित से, जैसा 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

सभापित िनदेश दȂ, सभा क े सदÎयȗ मȂ से एक सदÎय को राजघाट समािध सिमित का सदÎय होने 
क े िलए िनवार्िचत करने की कायर्वाही करे।" 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
REGARDING MATTERS RELATED TO VARIOUS RULES AND OTHER ISSUES 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I have received notices under Rule 267 from seven 
Members.  The notices from Shri Sandosh Kumar P,
 Shri Saket Gokhale, Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose, Shri Haris Beeran, Shri  Sanjay Singh and Shri Pramod Tiwari, 
Members seeking discussion on the order of  Government of Uttar Pradesh regarding 
display of names of owne rs of eateries and th eir employees along the Kanwar Yatra 
route.  The notice of Shri Md. Nadimul Haque, Member, is to discuss the matter 
of..…(Interruptions)…    
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सर, ... 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  One minute, let me finish. I think,  there is no hurry.  I have just 
requested all the hon. Members. We have  to set an example to other legislatures and 
to the nation also.  Let us go by rule s.  The notice of Shri Mohammed Nadimul 
Haque, Member, is to discuss the matter of  fake certificates being issued for the 
UPSC Exam.  Hon. Members are fully aware that notices are to be sent online. 
Ǜी जावेद अली खान (उǄर Ģदेश):    सर, मेरा और Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव जी का भी है।  
†ﺟﻧﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺩ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ: ﺳﺭ، ﻣﻳﺭﺍ ﺍﻭﺭ ﭘﺭﻭﻓﻳﺳﺭ ﺭﺍﻡ ﮔﻭﭘﺎﻝ ﻳﺎﺩﻭ ﺟﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﮯ۔
MR. CHAIRMAN: If you will just take your seat and carefully listen to what I am saying 
next, you will find the answer.  Notices are required to be sent in a specified mode 
and, I am, therefore, saying this.   Hon. Members are fully aware that notices are to 
be sent online as specified and those sent deviating from this have not received my 
consideration and that is the practice, we have been following for long. Hon. 
Members.... 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सभापित जी....  (Ëयवधान).... 
† Transliteration in Urdu script.
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
5

 
Ǜी सभापित :  एक िमनट रुिकए , पहले मȅ अपना फ ैसला सुना दूं। ....  (Ëयवधान).. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली) : सभापित जी, मȅ नोिटस क े बारे मȂ बता रहा था।  
....  (Ëयवधान).. 
 
Ǜी सभापित  :  संजय िंसह जी, एक सेक ं ड रुिकए।   ....  (Ëयवधान).. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सभापित
 जी, मȅ नोिटस क े बारे मȂ बता रहा था।   
 
Ǜी सभापित :  बताइए। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सभापित जी, मȅ नोिटस क े बारे मȂ बता रहा था िक इसके  बारे मȂ ऑिफस की तरफ 
से दो तरह की ËयवÎथा बताई जाती है। एक बात तो यह कही जाती है िक अगर आपको रूल  267 
का नोिटस िफिज़कली देना है, तो 9 बजे से पहले आकर दीिजए। दूसरी बात यह कही जाती ह
ै िक 
अगर आपको ऑनलाइन नोिटस देना है, तो 10 बजे तक दे दीिजए। हम लोगȗ को वह बात िक्लयर 
कर दी जाए िक हमȂ रूल  267 का नोिटस िफिजकली देना भी है या नहीं, अथवा िसफर् ऑनलाइन 
ही िदया जाएगा? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sanjayji
, it is a good point and we need to be clear about it.  We will 
again reiterate it in the post-lunch.  I have  already indicated the entire mechanism.  
Pramodji, do you want to say something? 
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, I just wanted to read Rule 267. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Before I take a view on the notices! 
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Before I take a view on the notices! अभी मȅने notices क े बारे मȂ िनणर्य 
नहीं िलया है।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सभापित जी, आप Ģनाउंस करȂग
े, तो अच्छा नहीं लगेगा, इसिलए आप पहले 
सुन लȂ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित :   यह बहुत अच्छा है िक मुझे क्या अच्छा लगता है, आप उस पर भी ध्यान दे रहे हȅ।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सभापित जी, ख्याल रखना पड़ता
 है।  
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी सभापित :  यह शुरुआत  बहुत अच्छी है, आप इसे इसी दृिÍट से कायम रिखए।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सभापित जी, वह आप पर िनभर्र करता है। आप हम लोगȗ को सुनते रिहए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : यह एक ही बात पर िनभर्र करता है िक इस सदन मȂ हम पूरी चचार् िनयम क े अनुसार 
करȂ।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी
 :  हाँ, सभापित जी। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : अगर हम िनयमȗ की पिरिध मȂ रहȂगे, तो सदन बहुत ठीक तरीके  से चलेगा।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  सभापित जी, यही तो हम लोग चाहते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित :  आप पीछे मत देिखए।  Look at the Chair.  
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, I am looking at you and the Chair al
so.   
 
Ǜी सभापित :  बोिलए।  What is your point of order? 
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, it is regarding Rule 267. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your point of order is under which rule?  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, उसी रूल  267 क े बारे मȂ है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Rule 267 is not regarding point of order. एक सेक ं ड, आप बैिठए। 
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI:  Sir, let me give a plain reading, मȅ बताउंगा िक यह कांवड़ यातर्ा 
क्यȗ की जाती है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :   Ģमोद जी, एक स
ेक ं ड, आप बैिठए।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  जी। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Pramodji, if you are raising a point of order which, as a Member, 
you are entitled, then, you will have to speci fy two things.  One, under which rule you 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
7

 
are raising the point of order and what the factual premise of  it is.   So, under which 
rule are you raising it?   
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, under Rule 238.... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let me come to Rule 238.   ...(Interruptions)...  एक सेक ंड।  R u l e 
238! 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  सभापित जी, मȅने रूल  267 कांवड़ यातर्ा क े िलए उठाया है। 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Pramodji, I strongly deprecate the practice of making a point.  That 
will not go on record.  You are raising a point of order under Rule 238.  You may 
kindly raise it under Rule 238.  Which pr ovision are you invoking? The provision of 
Rule 238 is before me now. 
   
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  सभापित जी, आप क्या देख रहे हȅ? क्या आप भाग 'ए' देख रहे हȅ?  
    
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am looking at Rule 238.  जो कहȂगे, वह देखूंगा।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  सर, आप देख लȂ,"बोलते समय कोई सदÎय िकसी ऐसे तथ्यात्मक िवषय का 
िनदȃश नहीं करेगा, जो न्याय-िनणर्याधीन हो।" सर, यह िवषय तो िनणर्याधीन नहीं है, इसि
लए मȅ 
इसको रख सकता हूं।         
          
Ǜी सभापित : ऐसा है िक आप 238 का tutoring मत कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप यह बताइए 
िक आप Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र Rule 238 क े कौन से Ģोिवज़न क े तहत रेज़ कर रहे हȅ? 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅने बोला तो िक अगर यह ठीक नहीं है, तो 267 देख लीिजए, 268 देख 
लीिजए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Rule 267 is not point of order.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ कहाँ कह रहा हूँ िक यह Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र ह
ै। ...(Ëयवधान)... जो 
Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र था, वह हमने बता िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मुझे अपना िनणर्य स
ुनाने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ िसफर् इस देश को बचाने की कोिशश कर रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : एक िमनट...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Pramodji, one minute. ...(Interruptions)... Pramod ji, take your 
seat. 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, बैठ जाएं? ...(Ëयवधान)... िफर खड़ा कर लीिजएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, no one can sit in this House without taking oath 
under the Constitution and that oath says  that we will protect  the integrity and 
sovereignty of the nation. So you are merely  reiterating that oath.  The point
 is well-
taken.  So hon. Members...  
  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir,...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, with your permission, I seek... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, you said that the notices fo r Rule 267 can be sent online. 
Supposing, if there is a failure of network or something, physically given notices can 
also be accommodated because, so long, it was only like that.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Good!  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Now you said 'online'.  We accep t it. We are very happy, it is 
easy. Supposing, if something happens, if it is physically given, kindly accept it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, taking note of wh at has emanated from the hon. 
Member and Shri Sanjay Singh, we will ha ve it now in two modes. We will issue a 
directive so that there is no difficulty, but I would still plead with the hon. Members, let 
us go digital. That will be a good message . But if for any reason whatsoever, we 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
9

 
receive it in hard copy in an exceptional situation, we will issue a directive and that will 
also be done. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav.  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, कभी-कभी अत्यिधक िडिजटल होना भी बड़ा 
नुकसानदायक होता है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : क्या? ...(Ëयवधान)... राम गोपाल जी, एक िमनट...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव : अभी कल परसȗ ही सारी दुिनया थम गई। ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरा आपसे 
यह अनुरोध है िक िडिजटल क े अलावा िफिजकली भी नोिटस िदया जाए, तो उसे Îवीकार कर 
लीिजए। म
ेरे जैसे पुराने लोगȗ को बड़ी मुिÌकल होती है। हम ऑनलाइन वगैरह ज्यादा क ु छ नहीं 
जानते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : राम गोपाल जी, मȅ आपके  बोलने से पहले आपकी भावना को भांप गया था और मȅने 
पहले ही कह िदया ह
ै... ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं, मȅने पहले ही कह िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव :  दोनȗ मȂ, चाहे वह ऑनलाइन हो या िडिजटल हो, दस बजे तक ही 
किरएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : मȅ पहले ही कह चुका हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव : ठीक है, सर। थ
ȅक यू। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मेरी गुजािरश है, मेरा अनुरोध है, मेरी Ģाथर्ना है िक जहाँ तक संभव हो, मेÇबसर् 
िडिजटल हȗ, पर कोई िवशेष पिरिÎथित है और ऐसा संभव नहीं है, तो मेÇबर क े अिधकारȗ को 
बचाते हुए, यह दूसरी ËयवÎथा भी करȂगे। इसकी Ģिकर्या आज दोपहर तक ही जारी कर दी 
जाएगी। Hon. Members...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This will not go on record . I take it not only as nuisance but also as 
disturbance...  Don't create it like a str eet.  Mr. Jairam Ramesh, you cannot create 
like this.  ...(Interruptions)... I take a very strong objection. (Interruptions)... One 
minute.  The hon. Member, firstly, is speaking while sitting in his chair; then, the hon. 
Member is speaking without getting my pe rmission and the hon. Member is using 
                                         
* Not recorded 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
disparaging words, objectionable! ...(Interruptions)...   Sorry! ...(Interruptions)... 
Nothing will go on record. I know. Please. ...(Interruptions)... I know both of you.  
...(Interruptions)...  I appeal to the senior leadership that let us rise to the occasion 
and see that the dignity of this House is not so shattered. I appeal to all of you in the 
front row. Please take care of it. ...(Interruptions)...  
 Hon. Members  ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, I have a point of order under Rule 238.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh) : Sir, please read the 'explanation' in 
Rule no. 238.  It says, 'The words "persons in high authority" mean persons whose 
conduct can only be discussed on a substa ntive motion drawn in proper terms under 
the Constitution...' This House has to abide by the In dian Constitution. And if some 
action has been taken by someone of the highest authority, which is against the basic 
tenets of the Constitution, it should be challenged in the House...(Interruptions)...  it 
should be discussed. I am raising a point under Rule 238...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)...  Digvijaya Singhji, 
you are a senior Member.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Nothing will go on r ecord.  Digvijaya Singhji, please cooperate with 
me.  I have noted it.  Let us not raise a point for the sake of it. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, I want ruling on that.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I will give a ruling.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Give it, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes.   
                                         
* Not recorded 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
11

 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Please give. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  T a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  a  v e r y  s e n i o r  M e m b e r  o f  t h i s  
House, Shri Digvijaya Singh, wants my ruling immediately.  As a senior Member of 
this House, he should be fully aware.  It is the discretion and prerogative of the Chair 
to reserve the ruling and you will have it in detail.  I have done it on earlier occasions 
also.  You will get a detailed, reasoned, informed ruling on this issue.  And, since it 
emanates from another Member's observation, we will keep that also in mind.   
 Hon. Members, I have given considerat ion to the notices received under Rule 
267 and I have gone through th em carefully.  I find these notices neither conform to 
the requirements of Rule 267 nor of the directives that have emanated from the Chair 
and the same are not accepted. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI SANJAY SINGH:  Sir,
 *  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, matters raised with permission of the Chair.  Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu - 'Concern over rising cases of  dubious drug trials having serious 
repercussions on the healthcare sector in the country'.  Please go ahead. 
 
Concern over the rising cases of dubious drug trials having serious repercussions on 
the health care sector in the country 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, it is my prime duty to bring to the 
notice of this House, a very serious issu e raised by the Ethical Committee of the 
National Institute of Virology about the risi ng cases of dubious drug trials in India 
which have serious repercussions on the whol e health sector.  It also raise serious 
questions about the monitoring  and quality control of the clinical studies in our 
country.  Recently, the Drug Controller General of India (DGCI) has received an 
appeal to investigate the critical gaps in  clinical trials by a pharma company to 
                                         
* Not recorded 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
develop a biosimilar product for treatment  of breast cancer.  For a company to 
conduct trials, all trials have to be registered with the Central Trial Registry of India.  
  
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
The most important factor in such trial is the genuineness of the original product 
which is considered the gold standard.  Any doubt about the authenticity of the gold 
standard is bound to give misgivings abou t the integrity of the whole trial and the 
effectiveness of the bios imilar copy being tested.  Sir, th e allegation is that the trials 
are being conducted just four months befo re the procurement of the gold standard 
drug from the original manufacturer. A principal assessor at the National Accreditation 
Board of Hospitals and the Quality Control of India had called the ethics committee of 
the medical colleges and the big hospitals as dysfunctional as they are just 
namesakes and do not scrutinize medical res earch properly in many instances.  This 
spurious thing is going undetected by th e IECs and the IRBs of the 40 premier 
institutions of the country.  It illustrates the porosity of the checks and balances on the 
ethical conduct of clinical trials.  This rais es a serious question about the authenticity 
of the trial data.  By no sleight of hand can this anomaly be brushed under the carpet.  
Human lives are at the stake if this drug sees the light of the dubious trial.  
Unfortunately, the same pharma company has a substantial large contribution 
through electoral bonds.  The data re leased by the Election Commission on 14
th 
March has revealed that 35 pharma companie s in India have contributed nearly 1000 
crores to political parties across the State and Centre through the companies which 
are being investigated for poor quality drugs which they have purchased through the 
bonds. As a member of the medical fraterni ty, Sir, I caution the Union Government to 
take stringent action against all those involved  in these unethical practices in clinical 
trials and not to play with the life of the innocent people by supporting and facilitating 
those who conduct dubious unethical drug tr ials in the country.  Sir, through the 
Chair, I request the hon. Minister of Health.  I will also give a personal writing to him 
on this issue with all the data.  Kindly ask him to do the needful.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu : Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhark hand), Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh) , Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivada san (Kerala), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
13

 
(Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shrimati Sulata  Deo (Odisha), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
(Assam), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri Jose K. Mani 
(Kerala) and Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala). 
 The next speaker is Shri A. A. Ra him - 'Concern over mismanagement of 
Railways in Kerala causing distress to the railway workers/passengers in the region'. 
 
Concern over mis-management of Railways in Kerala causing distress to the railway 
workers/passengers in the region 
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, no one seems to be able to understand the plight of 
train passengers in Kerala. Sir,  it is beyond our imaginatio n. A couple of weeks ago, 
six passengers fainted due to an uncontrolle d rush in Parasuram Express. A lot of 
similar incidents have been happening in Ke rala every day. Sir, the train journey has 
become a nightmare for Kerala passengers. We do not have adequate train services. 
The Union Government is very much intere sted in the 'renaming process'. They are 
changing the names of roads. They ar e changing the names of buildings and 
everything. The same trend is continuing  with the Railways also. The name of 
passenger trains has been changed as Expr ess special trains. Sir, the aftermath of 
this Tughlaqian reform, the ticket fare has increased.  
 The automatic signalling system is not implemented in Kerala. From 
Thiruvananthapuram to Ernakulum, the ma ximum speed of a train can only be 100 
kilometre per hour. From Ernakulum to Shornur, the maximum speed is only 90 
kilometre per hour. Sir, Kerala is a leadin g State in the country in terms of Railway 
passenger numbers and revenue. However, the Railway is not ready to improve 
infrastructure in Kerala and also, not even allowing the Kerala Government to do so. 
The Union Government is putting red tape on the dream project of Kerala K-Rail for 
mere vested political interests.  
 I would like to urge the Government that  do not scrap the K-rail project, do not 
scrap the future development of Kerala. Sir,  moreover Indian Railway is yet to come 
out of its colonial hangover. Their attitude is extremely inhumane. In the last week, in 
Thiruvananthapuram, a heart-breaking incide nt happened. Joy, a Railway contract 
worker from a poor family died when he was cleaning a canal for Railways. Not even a 
senior official of the Railways came to the spot to properly inspect the situation or 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
coordinate rescue operations. I have alre ady written a letter to the hon. Railway 
Minister. Unfortunately, there is no reply. ...(Interruptions)...  
 Sir, the Kerala Government has already ensured a befitting compensation for 
Joy's family and the Municipal Corporation of Thiruvananthapuram will build a house 
for them. I urge the Union Government to ensure a befitting compensation for this 
victim and also ...(Time-Bell rings)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
t h e  Z e r o  H o u r  m a t t e r  r a i s e d  b y  t h e  h o n .  M e m b e r ,  S h r i  A .  A .  R a h i m :    D r .  S a s m i t  
Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kuma r P (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu),  Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Na du), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu). 
 Your time is over, Mr. A. A. Rahim.  The next speaker is Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha - Demand to explore possibilities for new rail projects in Auraiya 
district of Uttar Pradesh.  आपने यह सÅजेक्ट उठाने क े िलए माननीय चेयरमैन को नोिटस 
िदया था। 
 
Demand to explore possibilities for new rail projects in Auraiya district of Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश) : उपसभापित महोदय, रेल भारत क े िवकास का इंजन 
है।  रेल आधािरत िवकास ने देश क े अनेक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िवकास मȂ अहम भूिमका िनभाई है।  उǄर Ģदेश 
मȂ औरैया क े लोग अनेक वषș से रेल आधािरत िवकास की Ģतीक्षा कर रहे हȅ।  औरैया तथा 
िनकटवतीर् अन्य Îथानȗ पर अनेक बार रेल की संभावनाओं पर सवȃक्षण भी हुआ है और सवȃक्षण मȂ 
लाखȗ रुपए  खचर् िकए जा चुक े हȅ।  वषș से चले आ रहे सवȃक्षण कायर् तथा लाखȗ रुपए  खचर् होने क े 
पÌचात भी औरैया क े लोगȗ को रेल की सुिवधा ĢाÃत नहीं हो सकी।   
 मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से िनवेदन करती हूँ िक पूवर् मȂ िकए गए सवȃक्षण क े आधार पर 
अथवा कन्नौज से िबधूना-औरैया होते हुए जालौन तक तथा बुंदेलखंड एक्सĢेसवे क े िकनारे 
हमीरपुर और औरैया होते हुए इटावा तक नए रेल मागर्, िजसका सवȃक्षण कायर् िकया जा चुका है, 
इन रेल पिरयोजनाओं को अितशीघर् जमीन पर उतारा जाए, िजससे औरैया, िबधूना और अन्य 
िनकटवतीर् इलाके  क े लोगȗ को रेल की सुिवधा उपलÅध होने क े साथ ही क्षेतर् क े िवकास की नई 
संभावना िवकिसत हो सके ।  धन्यवाद। 
 
MR.   DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha:   Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Brij Lal 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
15

 
(Uttar Pradesh) and Shri Baburam Nishad (Uttar Pradesh).                                                                  
 
Concern over increasing numbers of Digital Banking Frauds in Financial Year  
2023-24 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी ( महाराÍटर्) : सर, आरबीआई की एक एनुअल िरपोटर् आई है।  2023 मȂ 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय : सर, इनका माइक ऑफ हो गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : इनका माइक ऑन है।  
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी : सर, माइक बंद हो गया था।  There has been increase in financial 
frauds, as per RBI Report. 300 Ģितशत से ज्यादा बȅक ģॉड्स हो च
ुक े हȅ। इनमȂ 2 सालȗ मȂ 
बढ़ोतरी हुई है। उनमȂ अगर िडिजटल ģॉड्स की संख्या देखȂ, तो 2 सालȗ मȂ िडिजटल ģॉड्स मȂ 
708 Ģितशत की बढ़ोतरी हुई है। इसमȂ िडिजटल पेमȂट्स और िडिजटल बȅक लोन्स को लेकर 
सबसे ज्यादा गंभीरता िदखाई गई है। इसमȂ एक साल मȂ करीब 166 परसȂट की इंकर्ीज हुई है।  
इसकी वजह से पिÅलक सेक्टर बȅक्स जो Ģभािवत होते हȅ, वे करीब 75 Ģितशत हȅ और Ģाईवेट 
सेक्टर बȅक्स 67 परसȂट हȅ।   
 सर, मȅ इस मुǈे को इसिलए ग
ंभीरता से उठाना चाह रही हूँ, क्यȗिक ये उस आम जनता को 
Ģभािवत कर रहे हȅ, िजसको टेक्नोलॉजी तो िमल गई है, परन्तु उसको  यह समझ नहीं है िक 
उसका इÎतेमाल क ै से िकया जाता है।  उसको जो फाइनȂिशयल िलटर्ेसी होनी चािहए, उसके  ऊपर 
जोर नहीं डाला जा रहा है।  िडिज
टल टर्ंजेक्शंस 600 Ģितशत बढ़ चुक े हȅ, परन्तु उनमȂ जो 
िडिजटल ģॉड्स हो रहे हȅ, जो फाइनȂिशयल ģॉड्स हो रहे हȅ, वे 81 परसȂट हȅ।  इस पर गंभीरता 
से िवचार करना चािहए। िफिंशग कॉÊस होते हȅ, िफिंशग वेबसाइट्स बनाई
 जाती हȅ, 
impersonating calls होते हȅ, िजनकी वजह से लोग Ģभािवत होते हȅ।   
 सर, यहाँ तक ही नहीं, मȅ आईटी िमिनÎटर क े संज्ञान म Ȃ यह बात काफी बार ला चुकी हूँ।  
मोबाइल फोन्स पर Îटेट Îपȗसडर् हैिंकग होती है।   जनर्िलÎट्स हȗ, पॉिलिटिशयंस हȗ - पेगासस 
का मुǈा तो हमने उठाया ही है।..   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : सÅजेक्ट पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी : सर, यह इसी का ह
ै। यह िडिजटल ģॉड्स को लेकर ही है।  जो Îटेट 
Îपȗसडर् अटैक्स हो रहे हȅ, ऐसे िफर से दूसरे अटैक की सूचना आईफोन ने लोगȗ को दी है।  उनमȂ 
से बहुत से सीिनयर लीडसर् भी हȅ।  मȅने खुद इसके  बारे मȂ िचƻी िलखी है।  ए.ए. रहीम जी जो कह  
 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
रहे हȅ िक रेल मंतर्ी जी जवाब नहीं देते हȅ, तो मȅने भी एक िचƻी िलखी है, परन्तु उसका जवाब 
आज तक नहीं आया है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : सÅजेक्ट िडिजटल ģॉड्स है, माननीया िĢयंका जी। 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी : सर, इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम स े उÇमीद करती हूँ िक आप मंतर्ी जी को 
यह डायरेक्शन दȂगे िक वे इस पर संज्ञान लȂ और हम जो िचƻी िलखते हȅ, हम जो क ंसन्सर् उठाते 
हȅ, उनका जÊद से जÊद जवाब दȂ।  थȅक यू सो मच, सर। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by th
e hon. Member, Shrimati Priyanka Charurvedi: Shri 
Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Phulo De vi Netam (Chhattisgarh),  Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri  Sanjeev Arora (Punjab),  Shri Jose K. 
Mani (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tam il Nadu),  Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala),  
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri Suj eet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra),  Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkha nd),  Dr. John Brittsas (Kerala),  Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),  Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala),  and Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha).  माननीय Ǜी 
शिƪिंसह गोिहल जी। 
 
Concern over death of three labourers while working in illegal coal mine (Carbo Cell) 
in Surendra Nagar district of Gujarat 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल (गुजरात):  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ एक गÇभीर िवषय क े बारे मȂ शून्य काल 
मȂ बात करना चाहता हूँ।  गुजरात क े सुरेन्दर् नगर िडिÎटर्क्ट मȂ लो गर्ेड कोल काबȘसेल िमलता है, 
कोयला िमलता है।  वहाँ पर illegally खदान बनाई जाती
 है, गǀा खोदा जाता है।  खोदते-खोदते 
जब यह लगता है िक वहाँ कोल की लेयर िमली है, तब मजदूर उसमȂ समानांतर, horizontal 
खुदाई करते ह
ȅ।  कभी वहाँ गैस िनकलती है, तो कभी वहाँ जमीन बैठ जाती है, िजसके  कारण वहाँ 
मजदूर मरते रहते हȅ।  10 िदन पहले 3 मजदूर वहाँ अपनी जान गँवा चुक े हȅ।   
 सर, ये जो गǀे हȅ, उसी एिरया मȂ 1,000 से ज्यादा गǀȗ म
Ȃ काम चल रहा है।  ज्यादातर 
लोग इसकी क ंÃलȂट िलखवाने से भी डरते हȅ, क्यȗिक जब कोई पिरवार इसकी क ंÃलȂट िलखवाने 
जाता है िक मेरे पिरवार क े िकसी सदÎय की डेथ हो गई है, तो पुिलस कहती है िक वह illegal 
काम कर रहा था, तो FIR मȂ पहला नाम
 उसका िलखा जाएगा, इसिलए वे FIR तक दजर् करवाने 
नहीं जाते हȅ।  उसमȂ मरने वाले ज्यादातर लोग जवान होते हȅ।  वहाँ पर गǀा करवा कर जो काम 
करवाते हȅ, वे बहुत बड़े influential persons होते हȅ।  म
ȅ खुद उधर िविजट करने गया था, तब मुझे 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
17

 
बहुत सी जानकारी िमली।  Îथानीय लोग कहते हȅ िक हर महीने डेढ़ लाख रुपए  का हÄता नीचे से 
ऊपर तक िदया जाता है, तािक कोई इस illegal activity को नहीं रोके ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह जो 
क े स हुआ, उसमȂ हमने यह जानने की कोिशश की िक कौन यह गǀा करवा रहा था।  यह मजदूर 
क े िखलाफ नहीं होना चािहए, तो यह FIR बनी।  इस बार FIR बनी।  इसमȂ 4 
लोग दोषी हȅ।  इन 4 
दोषी लोगȗ मȂ से एक जो है, वह Åलॉक पंचायत की ÎटȂिंडग कमेटी का चेयरमैन है।  जो नÇबर ट ू 
एक्यूज्ड है, वह नेता है और उसकी बीवी िजला पिरषà मȂ मȂबर है और ...( Ëयवधान)... यह 
हकीकत वहाँ दजर् हुई FIR की ह
ै। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ अनुरोध करता हूँ िक इसको दूसरी तरह से 
मत लीिजए।  जान की कीमत कोई भी मुआवजा नहीं दे सकता ह ै।  इंसान की िजन्दगी सबसे बड़ी 
कीमती है।  हम सबको इसके  िलए क ंसनर् होना चािहए िक एक गरीब, जो जान गँवाता है, उसके  
पिरवार की क्या हालत होती है।   
 अत: मेरा अनुरोध है, माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  जिरए सरकार को कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक इसको लाइटली नहीं लȂ।  यह एक घटना नहीं है।  ऐसा बार-बार हो रहा है।  अभी 
िसफर् मȅ देखता हूँ, कोई भी देख ले - अगर आप गूगल मैप खोल कर वहाँ की सैटेलाइट इमेज 
देखȂगे, तो आपको वहाँ जो गǀे और black spots िदखȂगे, वे सारे black spots चोरी
 वाले गǀे क े 
हȅ, वहाँ गलत तरीके  से खुदाई हो रही है और वहाँ गरीब मजदूर अपनी जान गँवा रहा है। 
 इसिलए मȅ सरकार स
े अनुरोध करता हूँ िक वह इसकी ज्यूिडिशयल इन्क्वायरी करवाए या 
सीबीआई से जाँच करवाए।  चूँिक इसमȂ लोकल अथॉिरटी को हÄता जाता है, इसिलए यह ऐसे बंद 
नहीं होगा।  मेरा आपसे यही अनुरोध है, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Shak
tisinh Gohil:  Shri M. Shanmugam 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Priyanka 
Chatuvedi (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Sh rimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Jebi Mather  Hisham (Kerala), Sh ri P. Wilson (Tamil 
Nadu). Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Ms. Do la Sen (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala). 
 
Demand to allocate funds for pending public projects in the State of Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I rise to bring to the 
attention of the Union Government through this august House that several important 
public projects in Tamil Nadu have been stalled due to the refusal of the Union 
Government to sanction the eligible and entitled funds.    
 Firstly, the Chennai Metro Rail Ltd., Phase-II Project, inaugurated by the hon. 
Union Home Minister in 2020, with a project ed cost of Rs.63,246/- crores, has been 
pending for clearance and approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
the last three years. I request the hon.  Union Finance Minister to allocate the 
accepted 50 per cent of the Project cost  amounting to Rs.31,623/- crores 
expeditiously. Secondly, the Detailed Proj ect Reports for the Coimbatore, Madurai 
and Tiruchi Metro Rail Projects have also  been submitted to the Union Government 
and are pending approval for many months. Th irdly, with regard to the Tamil Nadu’s 
request for releasing of Rs.37,907/- crores  from the NDR Fund af ter the two natural 
calamities in last December, a mere Rs.276/ - crores has been released by the Union 
Government. I request the hon. Union Home Minister to release at least Rs.3,000/- 
crores immediately as an interim measure to undertake restoratio n and relief works in 
Tamil Nadu. Fourthly, several dues from the Government of  India are pending to be 
released to the Government of Tamil Nadu, including Rs.3,403/- crores to CMR 
subsidy and intra-State movement reimbursement, Rs.78/- crores towards Home 
Guards, Rs.188/- crores towards Railway Force, Rs.138/- crores towards Special 
Police Battalion at Tihar Jail and  Rs.52/- crores towards ESI Scheme.  Fifthly, for the 
Samagra Shiksha - Integrated Scheme for school education, the Project Approval 
Board has allocated Rs.3,533/- crores  for the year 2023 and 2024 and Rs.3,586/- 
crores for the fiscal year 2024-25 to the State of Tamil Nadu with the Union 
Government contribution of 60 per cent. However, not even a single rupee is 
released. I take this opportunity to remind the hon. Union Finance Minister that India 
is a union of States and India’s Constitu tion contemplates cooperative federalism 
between the States and the Union. The Union has to be fair in its fiscal allocation and 
devolution of funds to the States.  Tamil Nadu and its people are being penalized for 
political reasons and receiving discrimina tory treatment. The refusal of the Union 
Government to fund projects in Tamil Nadu and release owed funds is in violation of 
the Constitution and counter-productive. The hon. Union Finance Minister has to 
remember that Tamil Nadu’s growth is Indi a’s growth. Therefore, through this august 
House, I urge the hon. Prime Minister to step in and direct the concerned Ministries to 
approve all the pending projects and release entitled funds due to Tamil Nadu without 
any further delay.  Thank you very much, Sir.     
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri P. Wilson: Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (K erala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (O disha), Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil 
Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                       
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
19

 
                 Thank you, P. Wilson ji.  Now, Shri Muzibulla Khan.  Dr. Sasmit Patra will 
associate. 
 
Demand for Special Category Status to the State of Odisha  
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा) : उपसभापित महोदय,  मȅ ओिडशा राज्य को िवशेष राज्य का दजार् 
िदए जाने क े पक्ष मȂ अपनी बात रखना चाहता हूँ।  भारत की Ģगित तभी हो सकती है, जब राज्यȗ 
का िवकास होगा।  जब राज्यȗ का िवकास होगा, तभी 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास' का जो नारा 
िदया गया है, वह फ
ु लिफल हो सकता है।  मेरे नेता नवीन पटनायक जी क े बारे मȂ भारतवषर् क े 
सारे लोग जानते हȅ िक वे िकतनी िसिÇÃलिसटी से रहते हȅ और िकतने सीधे-साधे इंसान हȅ।   
उन्हȗने चार जोड़ी क
ु तार्-पायजामा  और चार जोड़ी हवाई चÃपल से 25 साल  ओिडशा राज्य मȂ 
शासन िकया।  जब वे मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तो वे बार-बार क ेन्दर् सरकार को ओिडशा को िवशेष राज्य का 
दजार् िदए जाने क े संबंध मȂ िचƻी िलखते थे।  हमारे संसद सदÎ य ने लोक सभा तथा राज्य सभा मȂ 
इस िवषय को उठाया, लेिकन क ेन्दर् सरकार ने अभी तक ओिडशा राज्य को िवशेष राज्य का दजार् 
नहीं िदया।  हम समझते हȅ िक इसके  िलए एक तय कर्ाइटीिरया है, क ु छ कानून हȅ, क ु छ िनयम हȅ, 
लेिकन िकसी की भलाई क े िलए इस कानून को बदला जा सकता है, इसमȂ अमȂडमȂट लाया जा 
सकता है।  हमारे राज्य मȂ 22 Ģितशत टर्ाइबल इलाका है, जहाँ आिदवासी लोग रहते हȅ।   यह 
बैकवडर् एिरया है और यह ट ूिरįम क े िलए भी जाना जाता है।  यहाँ पर Ģभु जगन्नाथ जी का मंिदर 
ह
ै, Ģभु िंलगराज जी का मंिदर है, कोणाकर् टेÇपल जैसा फ ेमस टेÇपल है, इसिलए यह ट ूिरįम क े 
िलए भी जाना जाता है। सर, हमारे ओिडशा मȂ 480 िकलोमीटर की कोÎटल बेÊट है , िजसके  
कारण हमारे राज्य को बार-बार तूफान झेलना पड़ता है।   महोदय ,इस कोÎटल बेÊट मȂ हमारे 
सात िजले आते हȅ और वे हȅ - गंजम , खोरधा , पुरी , क Ȃदर्पाड़ा , जगतिंसहपुर , भदर्क और 
बालासोर।  जब 1999 मȂ सुपर साइक्लोन आया था ,तब 10,000 से ज्यादा लोगȗ की जानȂ गई थीं 
और 20,000 से ज्यादा लोग बेघर हुए थे ,िजन्हȗने अपने मां-बाप को खो िदया था।  वषर् 2000 मȂ 
जब मेरे नेता नवीन पटनायक जी ओिडशा क े मुख्य मंतर्ी बने और ओिडशा का शासन अपने हाथȗ 
मȂ िलया ,तब उन्हȗने इस बात क े िलए कोिशश की िक साइक्लोन से क ैसा िनपटना है।  सर ,वहाँ 
हर साल साइक्लोन आता है ,लेिकन मȅ यहाँ क ु छ Ģमुख साइक्लोन्स क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहता हूँ।  
फाइिलन 2013 मȂ आया था ,हुदहुद 2014 मȂ आया था ,िततली 2018 मȂ आया था और फनी 2019 मȂ 
आया था।  सर ,आप जानते हȅ िक नवीन बाबू हर वƪ ज़ीरो क ै जुअÊटी क े मामले मȂ नंबर वन हȅ 
और देश तो क्या ,िवदेश क े लोगȗ से भी उनको इस बात क े िलए धन्यवाद िमला है िक वे ज़ीरो 
क ै जुअÊटी मȂ आगे बढ़ते हȅ। ...(समय की घंटी)...सर ,यहाँ बीजेपी क े अध्यक्ष ,नƿा जी बैठे हȅ, मेरा 
अनुरोध रहेगा, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान : सर, मȅ एक सेक ं ड मȂ अपनी बात खत्म कर रहा हूँ।  
 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद। Time is over. अब आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है।  
माननीय डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा जी, आप एसोिसएट करȂ।  
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान : * 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Sir, I am associating. Can I take ten seconds to make 
a point?  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please associate only.  
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA: Sir, I associate. I associate myself with this matter.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following Members also associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Muzibulla Khan: Shri P. Wilson (Tamil 
Nadu), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), and Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh).  
  Now Shri Golla Baburao, ‘Demand to  implement a comprehensive National 
Coastal Tourism Development Policy in the country’.  
  
Demand to implement a comprehensive National Coastal Tourism Development 
Policy in the country 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (Andhra Pradesh) : Thank you, hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, 
for giving me this opportunity. Sir, I wish to bring a very important and innovative idea 
to the notice of the Union Government. No w, in entire India, more than 9,700 
kilometres coastline is there, and, especia lly, in our Andhra Pradesh, 970 kilometres 
coastline is there. I am happy; but so far, the Union Government and the State 
Governments are developing some tourist-base  for the coastal line.  But, in fact, we 
can develop a comprehensive policy to develop the entire beach coastal line in almost 
all the States, from Gujarat to West Bengal , the entire coastline.  What I request the 
Union Government is to identify as many beaches as possible and start the resorts, 
hotels and other recreational clubs.  Ap art from this, what I request the Union 
Government and the State Governments is to kindly start the actuaries and also some 
other basic infrastructural facilities for all the coastal lines.  We can earn a lot of 
foreign exchange and we can also especia lly develop the fishery communities which 
                                         
* Not recorded  
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
21

 
are really immune to live in the coastal lines. Sir, our State Government has also taken 
excellent measures by even identifying th e 350 beaches and starting small, small 
hotels and recreational clubs.  
 Finally, I want to request the Union Government to start a comprehensive 
National Coastal Corridor Development Co rporation or an agency and allot some 
funds. In fact, we can earn a lot of foreign exchange from  this. Apart from that, we 
can provide employment opportunities to th e local communities who are living there 
and also the recreational activities to the in terested people or the foreigners who are 
just coming to our country.  
 Sir, in this august House, through yo u, I request the hon. Prime Minister, the 
Tourism Minister, the Fisheries Minister an d all other concerned Ministers to rethink 
about the new and innovative idea to star t a comprehensive policy for development of 
these corridors which would benefit the entire nation.                                                                   
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Golla Baburao:  Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri  Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharasht ra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha) 
 
Demand for long-term solution to prevent loss of life and property due to floods in 
Bihar 
 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ िबहार से हूं और िबहार मȂ डबल इंडन 
की सरकार िबहार क े गौरवशाली अतीत को पुनĢार्Ãत करने की ओर अगर्सर है। कई क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ अच्छे 
काम हो रहे हȅ, भारत सरकार से भी काफी सहयोग िमल रहा है, परंत
ु सदन क े माध्यम से मȅ 
सरकार का ध्यान िबहार की एक बड़ी समÎया की ओर आकृ Íट करना चाहता हूं। िबहार एक ऐसा 
राज्य है, िजसका दिक्षण का इलाका Ģाय: सुखाढ़ स
े और उǄर का इलाका Ģाय: बाढ़ से गर्िसत 
रहता है। खास तौर पर बाढ़ की जो समÎया है, इससे जीवन और संपिǄ की काफी क्षित होती रही 
है। यहां तक िक जब 1934 मȂ भूक ं प आया था, उसके  बाद बाढ़ आई तो पूरा उǄर िबहार तबाह हो 
गया और उǄर िबहार दो िहÎसȗ मȂ बंट गया, कनेिक्टिवटी खत्म हो गई। उस कनेिक्टिवटी की 
समÎया को दूर करने क े िलए अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार न े कोिशश की और उन्हȗने 
दोनȗ िसरȗ, िमिथलांचल और कोिसयांचल को जोड़ा। ये सारे काम हो रहे हȅ और मौजूदा सरकार 
ने भी िवकास क े िलए अनेकȗ योजनाएं बनाई हȅ। लेिकन िवकास क े जो काम होते हȅ, वे बाढ़ क े 
कारण बह जाते हȅ, ढह जाते हȅ। और बाढ़ का कारण है िक जो उǄर िबहार की निदयां हȅ, कोसी, 
गंडक और बागमती आिद का सारा क ैचमȂट एिरया - जहां वषार् होती है - नेपाल मȂ पड़ता है। नेपाल 
से वषार् का पानी हमारे िबहार मȂ आता है और िबहार की पिरसंपिǄ और जीवन को नÍट कर द
ेता 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
है। यह एक अंतरराÍटर्ीय समÎया है और अंतरराÍटर्ीय समÎया का समाधान भी अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर 
पर िकया जाना चािहए। देश की आज़ादी क े बाद ही एक िवशेषज्ञ क े.एल राव की अध्यक्षता मȂ 
सिमित बनी, उसने तत्कालीन सरकार को, यानी िक पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी की सरकार 
को सुझाव िदया िक कोसी मȂ बाढ़ रोकने क े िलए नेपाल मȂ हाई डैम की Îथापना की जाए। सरकार 
ने क ु छ नहीं िकया, तब से लेकर यह समÎया बनी हुई है। इसिलए हम सरकार से अनुरोध करते हȅ 
िक उǄर िबहार को...  
      
Ǜी उपसभा
पित : धन्यवाद। ...(Ëयवधान)... आपके  बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया। आपकी बात 
िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. Bhim Singh: Dr. Fauz ia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).         
   
Demand to include the history of the struggle against emergency, in school and 
college curriculum 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड) : धन्यवाद माननीय उपसभापित जी। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यहां एक 
गÇभीर िवषय उठाना चाहता हूं। Îवतंतर्ता
 संगर्ाम की तरह लोकतंतर् की बहाली क े संघषर् क े 
इितहास को भी Îकू ल एवं कॉलेज क े पाǸकर्म मȂ शािमल िकया जाना चािहए। आपातकाल भारत 
क े लोकतंतर् का काला अध्याय है, इसे कभी भुलाया नहीं जा सकता। उस समय रक्षक ही भक्षक  
बन गए थे। आज़ादी क े बाद इसे लोकतंतर् की दूसरी आज़ादी का नाम भी िदया गया था। Ǜीमती 
इंिदरा गांधी की सरकार ǎारा 1975 मȂ आपातकाल मȂ देश क े लोकतंतर् पर कलंक लगाया था। 
आपातकाल 21 महीने तक चला था, िजसमȂ नागिरक Îवतंतर्ता का हनन, असहमित का दमन 
और लोकतांितर्क िसǉ
ांतȗ को क ुचला गया था। इसके  साथ ही हजारȗ लोगȗ को िबना कारण क े 
जेलȗ मȂ ठ ूंस िदया गया, देश क े  लोकतंतर् को बचाने क े िलए अनेकानेक लोग बिलदान हुए। 
आपातकाल का वह िसयाह कालखंड लोकतांितर्क सेनािनयȗ क े िलए एक दु:ÎवÃन है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़ सीट पर बैठ कर आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल : आज भी उस दौर को याद करके  लोकतांितर्क स
ेनािनयȗ की आंखȂ नम हो जाती 
हȅ। िवपक्ष क े ज्यादातर नेता खुद आपातकाल की ज्यादितयȗ का िशकार हुए हȅ।  देश मȂ 1975 मȂ 
आपातकाल क े दौरान की गई ज्यादितयȗ और दमन का िवरोध करने वालȗ की ओर से की 
गई...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़ अपनी सीट्स पर बैठȂ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
23

 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल :  लड़ाई को समझाने वाला एक अध्याय Îकू ल एवं कॉलेज क े पाǸकर्म मȂ शािमल 
िकया जाए, िजससे सभी छातर्ȗ को पता चलना चािहए िक आपातकाल क्या था, इसे क ै से लगाया 
गया और क्यȗ लगाया गया? छातर्ȗ को आपातकाल क े बारे मȂ जानना चािहए।  उन बिलदािनयȗ क े 
स
ंघषर् को वतर्मान की और भावी पीढ़ी जान सके , इसिलए आपातकाल की संपूणर् गाथा बच्चȗ क े 
पाǸकर्म मȂ शािमल की जानी चािहए।   
 महोदय, आपातकाल को अगर सही तरीके  से पाǸ  पुÎतकȗ मȂ Îथान िदया जाए, तो 
लोकतांितर्क शिƪयȗ का िवकास होगा और Ģजातंतर् की जड़Ȃ मजबूत हȗगी।  सर, भावी पीढ़ी
 को 
इस काले अध्याय से पिरिचत कराने क े िलए Îवतंतर्ता संगर्ाम की तरह लोकतंतर् की बहाली क े 
संघषर् क े इितहास को भी Îकू ल एवं कॉलेज क े पाǸकर्म मȂ शािमल िकया जाना चािहए।  
आपातकाल लगाकर Ǜीमती इ
ंिदरा गांधी ने भारत क े संिवधान का गला घȗट िदया था। ...(समय 
की घंटी)... ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Shri Naresh Bansal:  Dr. Laxmikant Bajp ayee (Uttar Pradesh), 
Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Sa ngeeta (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Sadhna 
Singh (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Rambha i Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat), Shrimati Dharmshila 
Gupta (Bihar), Shri Subhash Chande r (Haryana), Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Ka lpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shrimati 
Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shri  Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh),  
Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri mati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar (Haryana), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Dr. 
Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri Amar Pal Mau rya (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Deepak Prakash 
(Jharkhand), Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Mahar ashtra), Shri Baburam Nishad (Uttar 
Pradesh),  Shri Aditya Prasad (Jharkha nd),  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
(Nagaland),  Shri Neeraj Shekhar (Utta r Pradesh), Shri Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tana vade (Goa),  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba 
Leishemba (Manipur), Shrimati Darshana Singh (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha), Shri Samik Bhattacharya and Dr. K. Laxman (Uttar Pradesh).  
        
  
Demand for allocation of Special Economic Zones in the state of Bihar 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार) : शुिकर्या। उपसभापित महोदय, एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय क े िलए 
आपके  समक्ष हूं।  देश की Ģगित का खाका उसका Åलू िंĢट िबहार जैसे राज्यȗ की Ģगित क े बगैर 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
संभव नहीं है।  िबहार Ǜम आपूिर्त राज्य क े टैग से िनकलना चाहता है।  यह टैग हमारे ऊपर 
औपिनवेिशक शासन काल से आज तक लगा हुआ है।  Îपेशल इकोनॉिमक ज़ोन की बात होती है। 
ये पूरे देश मȂ 378 हȅ और 265 ऑपरेशनल हȅ, लेिकन िबहार मȂ एक भी नहीं है।  मेरी सरकार से 
मांग है िक िबहार को िसफर् वोिंटग Îटेट मत मािनए।  िबहार को िवशेष राज्य का दजार्, जो हमारे 
ओिडशा क े साथी भी कह रहे हȅ, हमारे आंधर् Ģदेश क े साथी भी कह रहे हȅ, लेिकन सबसे पुरानी 
मांग हमारी थी।  सर, जब झारखंड बना, तो िबहार क े िहÎसे मȂ धूल, धूप और वषार् क े अलावा क ु छ 
नहीं बचा।  हमȂ भी Ģगित क े िनयामक पार करने हȅ और वह तब तक संभव नहीं ह ै... हमारे कई 
साथी, जो हमारे साथ काम कर चुक े हȅ, वे यह कहते हȅ िक िवशेष राज्य का दजार् न दे सको, तो 
िवशेष पैक े ज दो।   
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
सर, िवशेष राज्य और िवशेष पैक े ज क े बीच मȂ ' या' नहीं है।  िबहार को ' या' Îवीकार नहीं है।  
िवशेष राज्य का दजार् भी चािहए और िवशेष पैक े ज भी चािहए।  सर, एक चीज कहूंगा िक िबहार 
की Ģगित और िवकास क े मानदंड की जब चचार् हो, तो िबहार को संव
ेदना से देखने की जरूरत  
है।  िबहार को िसफर् चुनाव क े वƪ मȂ नहीं देखने की जरूरत नहीं है।  अभी पांच Îपेशल 
इकोनॉिमक जोन्स - मȅ आगर्ह करूं गा, सरकार क े सवȃसवार् हȅ और अध्यक्ष भी हȅ - ये जोन्स  
बोधगया, फतुहा, मुजÄफरपुर, भागलपुर और एक कोसी क े क्षेतर् म
Ȃ होना चािहए। न िसफर् पूरा 
िबहार, बिÊक भाजपा क े हमारे िमतर् भी जानते हȅ िक िवशेष राज्य का दजार् और िवशेष पैक े ज मȂ 
'या' नहीं होना है, हमȂ दोनȗ चािहए।  हम संसद मȂ मांग
Ȃगे और सड़क पर मांगȂगे।  जय िहन्द!   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by Shri Manoj Kumar Jha: Shrima ti Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Mahua  Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), 
Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri A.A. Rahi m (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) 
and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).                 
                                                                         
Concern over effects of Global warming in the country 
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई (गुजरात) : सभापित महोदय, आज मȅ आपके  माध्यम स
 े माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान एक गंभीर मुǈे पर क Ȃिदर्त करना चाहता हूं।  महोदय, ग्लोबल वािमȊग की बड़ी 
ĢॉÅलम है।  सभी इंसान Ģकृ ित क े पंच तत्व से बने हुए हȅ।  Ģकृ ित क े पांचȗ तत्वȗ की रक्षा करना 
हमारा सबका धमर् है।  पृथ्वी, आकाश, अिग्न, वायु और जल, इन पांचȗ तत्वȗ को सही करना भी 
हमारी िजÇमेदारी है।  हमारी निदयां ग
ंगा-यमुना और सरÎवती को हम माता की तरह पूजते हȅ।  
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
25

 
उनका नीर, जल अच्छा करना चािहए।  जो हमारे समुदर् तट हȅ, उनको भी अच्छा करना जरूरी है।  
हमारे जो िहल Îटेशन्स हȅ, वहां भी बहुत सारी ĢॉÅलÇस हȅ।  हमारी जलवायु मȂ बहुत बदलाव आ 
रहा है।  हमारे गुजरात मȂ अभी बहुत बािरश हुई है। इससे हमारे िकसानȗ क े खेतȗ  मȂ तीन-तीन, 
चार-चार फ ु ट पानी भर गया है।  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Babubhai  Jesangbhai Desai:  Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tam il Nadu), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shrimati Mahua 
Maji (Jharkhand) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).  
 
 
 
12.00 NOON 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question Hour. 
 
Projects to improve and increase groundwater level 
 
*1. SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA :  Will the Minister of JAL SHAKTI be pleased to 
state:  
 
(a) whether there is any project to improve groundwater level in the country, if so, 
the details thereof; 
(b) whether there is any plan to deep en water bodies such as lakes/dams/ 
reservoirs so as to increase the water storage capacity; 
(c) whether Government is updating the technology to clean rivers and water 
bodies; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI C. R. PATIL) (a) to (d) : A statement is laid 
on the Table of the House.  
 
 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Statement  
 
(a)    Water being a State subject, the issu es related to development, regulation and 
management of ground water is primarily the responsibilit y of the state governments. 
The Central Government provides technical support and financial assistance through 
its institutions and various centrally sponsored schemes. In this regard, the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti (MoJS) is implementing seve ral projects and schemes to continuously 
monitor and improve the ground water leve ls in the country whose brief outline is 
given below. 
The Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is implementing ‘Ground Water 
Management & Regulation Scheme’(GWM &R)under which National Aquifer 
Mapping and Management Programme (NAQUIM) has been implemented. Under 
NAQUIM all the mappable areas of the country (~25 lakh sq km) have been covered 
and suitable scientific ground water management plans at the block and district levels 
have been prepared and shared with the State Governments for implementation. 
Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to  Groundwater- 2020 has been prepared by 
CGWB in consultation with States/UTs whic h is a macro level plan indicating various 
structures for the different terrain cond itions of the country. The Master Plan 
envisages construction of about 1.42 cror e Rain water harvesting and artificial 
recharge structures in the country to harness 185 Billion Cubic Meters (BCM) of 
water. 
Additionally, CGWB has taken up several demonstrative projects for 
construction of artificial recharge structures like Bridge cum Bandhara (BCB) at five 
locations in Maharashtra, works in selected Aspirational Districts, works in identified 
water stressed areas of Rajasthan comprisi ng Jodhpur, Jaisalmer & Sikar districts 
etc. 
MoJS is implementing Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) since 2019 in the country in 
which special emphasis is being given fo r rainwater harvesting (RWH) / groundwater 
recharge. The 5th edition of JSA for 2024-25 with theme 'Nari Shakti se Jal Shakti' 
has been launched by the ministry in March 2024. JSA is implemented through local 
convergence of various schemes and fund s and some of the major interventions 
undertaken under the Abhiyan include construc tion and repair of rainwater harvesting 
structures including rooftop & water conserva tion structures. Activities also include 
construction and desilting of existing water bodies like ponds, tanks etc. with an aim 
to augment storage capacity to reduce the groundwater stress. 
MoJS is also implementing Atal Bhujal Yojana in select 80 water-stressed 
districts in identified 7 states, intending to improve the ground water levels and to 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
27

 
ensure sustainable management of groundwater resources with community 
participation. 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (DA & FW) is implementing Per 
Drop More Crop Scheme since 2015-16,  which focuses on enhancing water use 
efficiency at farm level through Micro Irrigation.  Under this centrally sponsored 
scheme, so far an area of 83.49 lakh hectare has been covered und er Micro Irrigation 
in the country. 
For sustainable management of ground wa ter resources in urban areas, Ministry 
of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has come up with Shallow Aquifer 
Management (SAM) project, to explore and showcase  different ways in which 
shallow aquifers can be rejuve nated in order to augment the overall water security of 
cities. Various initiatives like revival of heritage wells, injection borewells, percolation 
beds, recharge shafts etc. were taken up in select 10 cities resulting in visible 
improvement in ground water situation in the project areas. 
Moreover, The Central Ground Water Auth ority (CGWA) is working as the nodal 
agency for regulation and control of groundwater extraction in the country with an aim 
to discourage unbridled ground water ex traction and ensuring sustainable ground 
water regime. 
In addition to the above, the Govern ment of India has taken several other 
significant initiatives for the improvement of groundwater situation in the country 
which can be seen through link below- 
https://jalshakti-dowr.gov.in/document/steps-taken-by-the-central-government-
to-control-water-depletion-and-promote-rain-water-harvesting-conservation/ 
Similarly, several State Governments have  initiated their own schemes targeting 
overall water resource impr ovement and management. Pani Bachao Paisa Kamao by 
Punjab, Mera Pani, Meri Virasat by Harya na, Mission Kakatiya by Telangana, Jal 
Jeevan Hariyali Yojana by Bi har, Jalyukt Shibar by Maha rashtra, Sujalam Sufalam by 
Gujarat are few examples.  
 
(b) Concerning deepening/rejuvenating th e water bodies for increasing the storage 
capacity, Mission Amrit Sarovar was launche d by the Government of India which 
aimed at developing and rejuvenating at leas t 75 water bodies in each district of the 
country. As an outcome nearly 69,000 Am rit Sarovars have been constructed/ 
rejuvenated. 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Centrally sponsored scheme “Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of 
Water Bodies (WBs) ” is a component of Pradhan Ma ntri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(PMKSY) Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) being implemented by Ministry of Jal Shakti 
under which works like cleaning of traditional water bodies is taken up.  
Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Pr oject (DRIP) Phase-I implemented 
during 2012-2021 had provision for need-bas ed de-siltation of few reservoirs to 
restore their lost capacity to the extent po ssible. Currently, the DRIP Phase II and III 
scheme (2021-2031) is being implemented wherein too prov ision has been made for 
need based de-siltation of the reservoirs.  
    Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs is cu rrently implementing Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformati on (AMRUT) 2.0 Scheme under which 
Rejuvenation of water bodies and wells  in urban areas is one of the main 
components. Mission promotes water source conservation, recycle/ reuse of treated 
used water, by involving community at large.  
Under Mahatma Gandhi National Ru ral Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS), works relating to Natural Resource Management (NRM) which include 
water conservation and water harvesting st ructures to augment and improve ground 
water are taken up. Large scale desiltatio n projects for traditional water bodies, 
rejuvenation of river stretches etc. have been conducted by various state 
governments under the Scheme. 
 
(c) and (d) The Ministry is constantly expl oring and harnessing new technologies for 
cleaning of rivers and water bodies. Un der the Namami Gange programme of the 
Ministry, various innovative and new tech nologies have been adopted based on 
regulatory requirements and site conditions . The following are some of the important 
technologies being employed: 
i. Multi-storey Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs): 
ii. Nature-based sewage treatment using Constructed Wetlands 
iii. Packaged Sewage Treatment Plant – 'Johkasou‘: 
iv. Advance Oxidation Process (AOP): 
v. Electrocoagulation: 
vi. Mandatory Tertiary Treatment by filtration and disinfection to achieve the 
stringent norms for river revival. 
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
29

 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA: Sir, would the hon. Minister of Jal Shakti be pleased to 
state as to what specific new technologies, innovations and pilot projects are being 
implemented to enhance the cleaning of rive rs and water bodies and also to improve 
the groundwater level and its management? 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल :  माननीय सभापित जी, पूरी दुिनया की सभी टेक्नोलॉजीज़ का उपयोग 
हमारी सरकार कर रही है। मंतर्ालय की ओर से यह टेक्नोलॉजी हर Îटेट को दी गई है और 
उसका उपयोग करते हुए सभी निदयȗ को साफ रखने क े िलए काम िकए गए हȅ। जो भी पानी पीने 
क े िलए जाए, वह पीने लायक हो, उसके  िलए पूरी कोिशश मंतर्ालय की ओर स
े की गई है। इसका 
पिरणाम भी हमȂ देखने को िमला है। जो आरोग्यवधर्क पानी की मुिÌकलȂ थीं, जो ĢॉÅलÇस थीं, वे भी 
सॉÊव होने लगी हȅ और पानी की िशकायतȗ का नÇबर भी नीचे गया ह
ै।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala. 
 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA : Sir, I come from the State of Gujarat, which is a rain-
deficit State.  I would like to ask the ho n. Minister if there are any schemes and 
projects that are in the planning stage besides the projects that are already 
functioning in the State of Gujarat. 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल : माननीय सभापित जी, गुजरात क े अंदर एक समय था जब पानी की कमी 
थी। मगर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, जब गुजरात क
े  मुख्य मंतर्ी थे तब उसी टाइम उन्हȗने पूरी 
Ãलािंनग करते हुए काम िकया था, िजसकी वजह से आज गुजरात क े हर गांव मȂ पानी पहुंच रहा 
है। वहां पर पीने क े िलए भी पानी पहुंच रहा है और नमर्दा योजना से एगर्ीकÊचर का जो क्षेतर् है, 
उन सबको पानी िमल रहा है। इसके  कारण िकसानȗ को भी बहुत फायदा हुआ है। वे वहां पर तीन-
तीन फसल ले रहे हȅ और इसके  कारण वहां पर सभी िकसान समृǉ हुए हȅ। इन सभी योजनाओं स
े 
क ृिष को पानी िमल रहा है और पीने क े िलए भी पानी िमल रहा है। कच्छ क े बॉडर्र तक पानी देने 
का काम भी आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने, जब वे मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तब िकया था। उसके  कारण बॉडर्र 
पर सुरक्षा म
Ȃ लगे हमारे जवानȗ को भी पीने क े िलए शुǉ पानी िमल रहा है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan. 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन:  सर, माननीय मंतर्ी जी न
े माननीय सदÎय क े सवाल का जवाब नहीं 
िदया, जबिक गुजरात से ये भी आते हȅ और वे भी आते हȅ। सवाल मȂ पूछा गया िक यह कमी है, 
लेिकन वे कह रहे हȅ िक सब क ु छ हो गया।  
 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी सभापित: मैडम, आप क्वेÌचन पूिछए।  
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Sir, I am a bit confused.  I expected 
clarification from the hon. Minister. I am a bit confused.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I can't agree.  You can never be confused. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN: Sir, I am.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You are not. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Sir, Mr. Jhala comes from Gujarat.  The 
Minister also is saying that Ģधान मंतर्ी ने, जब वे मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, सब क ु छ कर िदया, then, 
why is Mr. Jhala complaining? 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please put your supplementary.  You will get a good answer. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Sir, I want to know.  I am confused.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, please put your supplementary.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : यह जवाब देश क े िलए है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन:  क्या ह
ै?  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, please put your supplementary.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : देश को तो बताना पड़ेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... क्या मंतर्ी जी जवाब भी न दȂ!  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Neeraj ji, please. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, please control.   
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन:  उनके  पास सब क ु छ है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हर सवाल का जवाब ह
 ै। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
31

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Leader of the House, please see that there is order. 
...(Interruptions)...    Let the hon. Member ask the supplementary. 
 
SHRI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN:  I am really surprised, again confused, that 
instead of the Minister, other Members are standing and qu estioning me.                       
सभापित जी, आप यहाँ बैठे हुए हȅ, लेिकन उन्हȂ नहीं टोकते हȅ, पर अगर हमारे यहाँ से कोई खड़ा 
हो जाएगा, तो िबÊकु ल टोक दȂगे।   This is not fair.  I don't expect this from you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप एक सेक ं ड सुिनए। I think I am fair to every Member.  Those who got up 
there know it.  I would urge ev eryo
ne.  But when I do it this side, it is more noticed.  
When I do it that side, it is not noticed.  Madam, your supplementary. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN :  That is not noticeable, Sir.  You correct us 
more; so, it is noticeable.  You don't correct them. So, it is not noticeable.   It is as 
simple as that.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Oh my God! 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN :  Sir, this is what I want to ask the Minister.  
What is the mechanism that exists for punishing violation of conditions in the No 
Objection Certificates of Ground Water Use?   Give the details of units assessed as 
overexploited, as mentioned in the Economic Survey of 2021 an d the funds allocated, 
disbursed and utilised for the replenishment of the same State-wise and UT-wise.   
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल  :   सभापित जी, जया जी क े मन मȂ जो क ंÄयूज़न था, उसके  िलए मȅ उन्हȂ 
बताना चाहता हूं वे आज गुजरात क े िकसी भी गाँव मȂ जाकर देखȂ, उन्हȂ वहाँ पर शुǉ पानी िमल 
सकता है। वे क ृिष की बढ़त की ऑिफिशयल िफगसर् भी देख सकती हȅ। महोदय, मȅ और ĢÌनकतार् 
दोनȗ ही गुजरात से हȅ, इसिलए मȅने इसके  बारे मȂ ज्यादा िडटेल मȂ नहीं कहा, क्यȗिक उन्हȂ यह 
लगता िक मȅ ग
ुजरात क े बारे मȂ बहुत अच्छा बताना चाहता हूं, मगर यह काम अच्छा हुआ है और 
िजसने अच्छा िकया है, उस बात का उÊलेख करना भी जरूरी  था, इसीिलए मȅने कहा था।  
..(Ëयवधान).. सभापित
 जी, जो िनयम बनते हȅ, अगर उन िनयमȗ का उÊलंघन होता है, तो कायदे 
क े अनुसार ËयवÎथा है। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV :  Sir, this is not the answer to the question of  Shrimati 
Jaya Amitabh Bachchan.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Ram Gopal ji, you are a senior Member.    
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल : सभापित जी, जो कानून बने हȅ, उनके  तहत ही िनयम बने हȅ। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
उनके  पेटा िनयम भी बने हȅ। ..(Ëयवधान).. अगर कोई उनका उÊलंघन करेगा, तो उसके  िलए भी 
ËयवÎथा है। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Jaya ji, take your seat.  He is replying.  ...( Interruptions)...  Jaya 
ji, take your seat.   
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल  :   जया जी का ĢÌन है िक जो इनका उÊलंघन करेगा, उसे क्या सजा होगी, 
इसके  िलए मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक उन
 िनयमȗ मȂ और पेटा िनयम मȂ इस बात का उÊलेख 
िकया गया है। महोदय, हम माननीय सदÎया को उसके  बारे मȂ िलिखत रूप  मȂ भी बता दȂगे। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fourth supplementary, Shri Sujeet Ku
mar.   
 
Ǜी सुजीत क ुमार : सर, भूजल का Îतर बढ़ाने क े िलए सरकार ने दो बहुत अच्छी ÎकीÇस शुरू  की 
थीं, जो  ' अटल भूजल योजना '  और  ' िमशन अमृत सरोवर'  क े नाम से हȅ।  सभापित जी, मȅ 
सरकार से यह जानना चाहता हूं िक ये जो दो ÎकीÇस हȅ, क्या  इनका कोई ऑिडट हुआ ह
ै और 
इन योजनाओं क े चलते भूजल क े Îतर मȂ िकतना इÇपर्ूवमȂट हुआ है?    
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल  :   सभापित जी, जब हमने Îवतंतर्ता क े 75 साल  का अमृत वषर्  मनाया
, 
उसी टाइम हर िजले मȂ करीब 75 अम ृत सरोवर बने और हर सरकार, हर राज्य सरकार ǎारा 
उसकी िरपोटर् भी भेजी गई। उनके  ǎारा सभी कायș को पूणर्ता दी गई है, हर जगह पूरा काम हुआ 
है, िजसकी वजह से जल का Îतर भी बहुत अच्छा बढ़ा है। महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक यह 
योजना बहुत सफल हुई है।  
 महोदय, उनका जो दूसरा ĢÌन है, िजसमȂ भूजल की बात है, उस संदभर् मȂ मȅ बताना 
चाहता हूं िक इसके  िलए अलग-अलग
 िनयम बने हȅ, अलग-अलग योजनाएँ बनी हȅ। महोदय, 
इनकी वजह से भी भूजल का Îतर बहुत ऊपर आया हुआ है, लेिकन हमȂ इन्हȂ क ंटीन्यू रखना 
पड़ेगा।  सभापित महोदय, मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक इस ' अमृत सरोवर योजना'   की वजह 
से पानी का Îतर ऊपर आया ह
ै, उसकी क्वािलटी सुधरी है, उसकी सीओडी, बीओडी मȂ भी 
बदलाव आया ह
ै, मगर महोदय, अगर हम लोग इसे हर साल नहीं करते रहȂगे, तो भूजल का Îतर 
वापस नीचे जाने की संभावना है। जमीन से पानी न िनकालȂ और मंतर्ालय की जो ' क ै च िद रेन' 
योजना है, उसका पालन करȂ। महोदय, रेन वॉटर हावȃिंÎटग क े िलए म
ंतर्ालय की ओर से बहुत से 
िडज़ाइन भी बनाए गए हȅ, अलग-अलग एनजीओज़ ने भी िडज़ाइन बनाए हȅ और उन पर बहुत 
अच्छा काम गुजरात मȂ भी हो रहा है। एक-एक गाँव मȂ करीब 50-50 बोर बनाकर पानी उतार रहे 
हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... मȅ सबसे िवनती करता हूँ िक वे रीचाजर् क े िलए भी काम करȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
33

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Kartikeya Sharma. ...(Interruptions)...   Fifth supplementary. 
...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA: Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to ask from the hon. 
Minister: What are the steps being ta ken to increase groundwater recharge 
mechanisms in the rural parts of India, particularly in the State of Haryana? If so, what 
are the results achieved so far?  
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल : महोदय, यह जो ĢÌन उठाया गया है, मȅ उसके  संबंध मȂ बताना चाहता हूँ 
िक सकारात्मक िवÌवास क े पिरणामÎवरूप भूजल मȂ अित दोिहत क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ उÊलेखनीय िगरावट 
आई थी। 2017 से घटकर आज वह 2023 मȂ लगभग
  11 परसȂट तक रह गया है, यानी उसमȂ छ: 
परसȂट का सुधार हुआ है। भूजल सुरिक्षत क्षेतर् 63 परसȂट से बढ़कर 73 परसȂट हो गया है। जो डाकर् 
जोन था, उसमȂ भी कमी आई है। 2019 से Ģत्येक वषर् 52 से 70 परसȂट तक भूजल िनगरानी क ु ओं मȂ 
िपछले दशक की तुलना मȂ इस Îतर की वृिǉ देखी गई है। वषर् 2019 से 2023 तक मानसून क े बाद 
क े मौसम मȂ 85 परसȂट से अिधक िनगरानी Îटेशनȗ पर जल Îतर दस मीटर से कम िदखा है। यह 
जो योजना बनी है, सभी राज्यȗ ने उसके  ऊपर काम िकया है, सभी एनजीओज़ ने काम िकया है, 
सभी लोगȗ ने काम िकया है, उसके  कारण यहाँ पर सुधार िदख रहा है। यह अत्यंत आवÌयक है। 
मंतर्ालय यह कर रहा है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Q. No.2; Shri Neeraj Shekhar. ...(Interruptions)...  One second 
please! ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, on a questi on, five supplementaries are 
allowed -- two by the hon. Member who rais ed the Question and three by others.  I 
have allowed all three.  ...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, I ha
ve also given in writing.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Digvijaya Singhji, everyone has gi ven in writing.  I am sorry.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Q. No.2; Shri Neeraj Shekhar. 
 
Status of Har Ghar Jal Yojana 
 
*2. SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR: Will the Minister of JAL SHAKTI be pleased to state:  
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

(a) the details of fund allocated, released , and utilized under Har Ghar Jal Yojana
during 2023-24 and 2024-25, year-wise and State-wise;
(b) the details of targets and number of  households covered under the scheme
during 2023-24 and 2024-25 till 30th June, 2024, year-wise and State-wise ;
and
(c) the number of households targeted to  be covered under the scheme during
current financial year, State-wise?
THE MINISTER OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI C R PATIL): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on 
the table of the House. 
Statement 
(a) Government of India in partnership wi th States, is implementing Jal Jeevan
Mission (JJM) – Har Ghar Jal to make prov ision of tap water supply to every rural
household. The year-wise and State/ UT-wise details of fund allocated, released and
utilized under JJM during 2023-24 and 2024-25 (as on 16.07.2024) is at Annex-I.
(b) and (c) At the time of announcement of  Jal Jeevan Mission in August 2019, 3.23
Crore (17%) rural households were reported  to have tap water connections. All the
remaining rural households at the time of launch of the Mission were targeted for
providing tap water connection. As repo rted by States/ UTs, 8.39 Crore rural
households were provided with tap water connections till 2022-23. Further, in 2023-
24, nearly 3 Crore households and in 2024-25 (till 30.06. 2024), 31.28 lakh
households have been provided tap wate r connection. Thus, as on 30.06.2024, out
of 19.30 Crore rural households in the country, 14.93 Crore (77.31%) households
were reported to have tap water supply in their homes.
State/ UT wise details of targeted/ remaining rural households and households 
provided with tap water connections till 2022-23, in 2023-24 and in 2024-25 till 
30.06.2024 are at Annex-II. 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
35

Annex-I 
Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the States and reported utilization in 2023-24 
 (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Central share Expenditure 
under State 
share 
Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
allocated 
Fund 
drawn 
Available 
fund 
Reported 
utilization 
1. A & N Islands  2.20   7.52   3.76   5.96   0.99   -  
2. Andhra Pr.  397.70  6,530.49   793.57  1,191.27  862.09  940.04 
3. Arunachal Pr.  284.30   1,057.11  771.21  1,055.51  1,016.78  125.79 
4. Assam  2,447.47  10,351.68   6,204.00   8,651.47   7,870.90  866.11 
5. Bihar  54.95   -  ND   54.95   NR  NR 
6. Chhattisgarh  273.99  4,485.60  2,885.56  3,159.55  2,639.44  2,627.64  
7. Goa  0.92   11.25   11.25   12.17   11.76   11.25  
8. Gujarat  1,088.66  2,982.85  2,237.14   3,325.80  2,377.83  2,676.40  
9. Haryana  100.67  1,053.44  526.72  627.39  589.79  687.56 
10. Himachal Pr.  547.72   379.67  402.34  950.06  859.96  98.38  
11. J&K  903.84   9,611.31  3,267.12  4,170.96   3,510.52  364.69  
12. Jharkhand  529.38  4,722.76   2,875.35  3,404.73  3,140.70   3,291.53 
13. Karnataka  1,182.78  12,623.37  4,966.62   6,149.40  5,239.07  6,017.19 
14. Kerala  900.69  1,342.36   671.18  1,571.87  1,465.41   1,448.53 
15. Ladakh  280.68  477.11   131.07  411.75   346.73   -  
16. Lakshadweep  9.25   39.63   19.82   29.07   NR  -  
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
17. Madhya Pr.  1,060.06   10,297.86   5,419.90   6,479.96   6,388.57   6,390.54  
18. Maharashtra  2,363.74   21,465.88   7,444.26   9,808.00   8,208.53   8,371.34  
19. Manipur  164.42   110.54  ND   164.42   119.49   18.75  
20. Meghalaya  369.04   3,567.25   1,500.00   1,869.04   1,572.14   171.69  
21. Mizoram  121.27   425.46   303.10   424.37   416.52   43.77  
22. Nagaland  19.57   366.86   314.90   334.47   293.35   44.02  
23. Odisha  799.32   2,108.54   2,108.54   2,907.86   2,441.62   2,428.40  
24. Puducherry  5.40   15.39   1.00   6.40   6.39   0.62  
25. Punjab  -   479.02   119.76   119.76   103.79   166.43  
26. Rajasthan  3,431.61   3,019.94   250.00   3,681.61   2,899.24   3,904.02  
27. Sikkim  79.29   634.55   251.61   330.90   318.98   29.67  
28. Tamil Nadu  813.45   3,615.56   2,617.10   3,430.55   2,607.29   2,601.54  
29. Telangana  26.06   -  ND   26.06   NR   NR  
30. Tripura  227.01   1,773.40   744.18   971.19   860.09   105.25  
31. Uttar Pr.  2,812.52   20,884.45   16,947.00   19,759.52   19,087.04   20,269.16  
32. Uttarakhand  282.07   4,689.69   1,890.66   2,172.73   1,949.33   237.66  
33. West Bengal  1,751.06   3,806.29   4,206.29   5,957.35   5,004.16   5,155.11  
 
DNH & DD does not avail fund 
Source: JJM - IMIS  ND: Not Drawn  NR: Not Reported 
 
 
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
37

 
Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the States and reported utilization in 2024-25 
 (As on 16.07.2024) 
 (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Central share Expenditure 
under State 
share 
Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
allocated Fund drawn Available 
fund 
Reported 
utilization 
1. A & N Islands  4.97   2.98   ND   4.97   NR   -  
2. Andhra Pr.  329.17   2,520.97   ND   329.17   65.04   58.63  
3. Arunachal Pr.  38.73   217.82   32.67   71.40   15.36   0.01  
4. Assam  780.57   5,198.78   779.82   1,560.39   1,251.48   138.56  
5. Bihar  54.95   -   ND   54.95   NR   NR  
6. Chhattisgarh  520.11   1,277.27   ND   520.11   NR   NR  
7. Goa  0.40   4.32   ND   0.40   NR   NR  
8. Gujarat  947.97   2,420.14   ND   947.97   350.39   419.97  
9. Haryana  37.60   462.03   ND   37.60   3.83   7.49  
10. Himachal Pr.  90.10   916.53   ND   90.10   7.11   0.01  
11. J&K  660.43   2,112.86   ND   660.43   327.82   NR  
12. Jharkhand  264.03   2,114.22   ND   264.03   6.29   138.14  
13. Karnataka  910.33   3,804.41   ND   910.33   11.08   64.51  
14. Kerala  106.45   1,949.36   292.40   398.85   301.25   296.72  
15. Ladakh  65.02   624.78   ND   65.02   6.55   -  
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
16. Lakshadweep  29.06   0.75   0.11   29.17   NR   -  
17. Madhya Pr.  91.39   4,044.70   2,022.35   2,113.74   797.15   799.64  
18. Maharashtra  1,599.47   5,352.93   802.94   2,402.41   371.31   536.21  
19. Manipur  44.93   -   ND   44.93   10.58   0.94  
20. Meghalaya  296.90   653.60   ND   296.90   231.43   21.82  
21. Mizoram  7.85   45.09   ND   7.85   5.12   1.95  
22. Nagaland  41.12   39.75   ND   41.12   34.55   NR  
23. Odisha  466.24   2,455.94   ND   466.24   30.59   30.06  
24. Puducherry  0.01   12.58   ND   0.01   NR   NR  
25. Punjab  15.97   644.54   ND   15.97   0.24   NR  
26. Rajasthan  782.37   11,061.46   1,659.22   2,441.59   1,080.11   374.54  
27. Sikkim  11.92   124.50   ND   11.92   0.17   0.02  
28. Tamil Nadu  823.25   2,438.89   ND   823.25   534.84   541.18  
29. Telangana  26.06   -   ND   26.06   NR   NR  
30. Tripura  111.10   736.75   110.51   221.61   61.07   5.46  
31. Uttar Pr.  672.48   12,621.95   3,786.59   4,459.07   3,132.04   2,315.59  
32. Uttarakhand  223.40   1,016.80   152.52   375.92   67.31   NR  
33. West Bengal  953.19   5,049.98   1,514.99   2,468.18   1,015.58   1,029.51  
DNH & DD does not avail fund 
Source: JJM - IMIS  ND: Not Drawn  NR: Not Reported 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
39

 
 
Annex-II 
 
State/ UT-wise details of targeted rural households and households provided with tap water connections 2023-24 and 2024-25 
(as on 30.06.2024) 
(Number in lakhs) 
S. 
No. 
State/ UT Total rural 
HHs  
Rural HHs with tap 
water connection as 
on 15/08/2019 
Targeted/ 
remaining rural 
households in Aug. 
2019 
Rural HHs provided with tap water Rural HHs with tap water 
Till 22-23 In 23-24 In 24-25 No. In% 
1. A & N Islands 0.62 0.29 0.33  0.33   -   -   0.62   100.00  
2. Andhra Pr. 95.45 30.74 64.70  35.43   3. 86   0.06   70.11   73.45  
3. Arunachal Pr. 2.29 0.23 2.06  1.54   0.52   -   2.29   100.00  
4. Assam 71.42 1.11 70.31  30.83   22. 95   2.19   57.09   79.76  
5. Bihar 166.30 3.16 163.14  155.92   1.27   -   160.35   96.08  
6. Chhattisgarh 50.00 3.20 46.80  17.72   18.05   0.24   39.21   78.33  
7. DNH and DD 0.85 0.00 0.85  0.85   -   -   0.85   100.00  
8. Goa 2.63 1.99 0.64  0.64   -   -   2.64   100.00  
9. Gujarat 91.18 65.16 26.02  26.02   -   -   91.18   100.00  
10. Haryana 30.41 17.66 12.75  12.75   -   -   30.41   100.00  
11. Himachal Pr. 17.09 7.63 9.46  9.17   0.29   -   17.09   100.00  
12. J&K 18.72 5.75 12.96  5.21   3.47   0.64   15.08   80.64  
13. Jharkhand 62.19 3.45 58.74  16.90   11. 93   1.31   33.60   53.90  
14. Karnataka 101.15 24.51 76.64  42.92   9.23   1.82   78.48   77.59  
15. Kerala 70.80 16.64 54.16  16.83   3.67   0.54   37.68   53.17  
16. Ladakh 0.41 0.01 0.39  0.29   0. 07   0.00   0.38   93.07  
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
S. 
No. 
State/ UT Total rural 
HHs  
Rural HHs with tap 
water connection as 
on 15/08/2019 
Targeted/ 
remaining rural 
households in Aug. 
2019 
Rural HHs provided with tap water Rural HHs with tap water 
Till 22-23 In 23-24 In 24-25 No. In% 
17. Lakshadweep 0.13  0.13  -   0.11   0.01   0.12   88.71  
18. Madhya Pr. 111.88 13.53 98.35  43.86   11. 30   2.19   70.89   63.39  
19. Maharashtra 146.72 48.44 98.29  61.41   15 .17   1.25   126.26   86.06  
20. Manipur 4.52 0.26 4.26  3.19   0. 08   0.06   3.59   79.45  
21. Meghalaya 6.51 0.05 6.47  3.03   1.91    0.20   5.18   79.59  
22. Mizoram 1.33 0.09 1.24  1.01   0. 23   -   1.33   100.00  
23. Nagaland 3.69 0.14 3.55  2.29   0.75   0.11   3.29   90.53  
24. Odisha 88.68 3.11 85.57  49.54   12.06   0.62   65.33   73.65  
25. Puducherry 1.15 0.94 0.21  0.21   -   -   1.15   100.00  
26. Punjab 34.18 16.79 17.39  17.39   0. 00   0.00   34.18   100.00  
27. Rajasthan 106.93 11.74 95.19  27.10   12.1 8   3.17   54.19   50.61  
28. Sikkim 1.33 0.70 0.63  0.38   0.10   0.00   1.18   88.74  
29. Tamil Nadu 125.24 21.76 103.48  57.72   23. 05   2.72   105.25   84.06  
30. Telangana 53.98 15.68 38.30  38.30   -   -   53.98   100.00  
31. Tripura 7.49 0.25 7.24  4.34   1.32   0.18   6.09   81.26  
32. Uttar Pr. 265.42 5.16 260.26  89.50   120. 51   8.08   223.25   83.98  
33. Uttarakhand 14.54 1.30 13.24  10.09   2.25   0.12   13.77   94.76  
34. West Bengal 175.09 2.15 172.94  56.60   22. 92   5.75   87.41   49.90  
 Total  19,30.33   3,23.63  16,06.70  8,39.33   2,99.26   31.28   14,93.50   77.31  
 
Delhi & Chandigarh have no rural population.      Source: JJM-IMIS         HH: Household 
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
41

 
SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR : Sir, we can discuss that later. मेरा ĢÌन आ गया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... बड़े महीनȗ बाद, बड़े सालȗ बाद मेरा ĢÌन आया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, यह 
क्या है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Digvijaya Singhji, you are an experienced Member. 
...(Interruptions)...   Do you think casting su ch aspersions is right that everyone will 
speak? I have to decide. ...(Interruptions)...   Why are you rising, Mr. Shaktisinh? 
...(Interruptions)...  What is this -- this side and this side? ...(Interruptions)...  
   
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : सर, मȅने बोल िदया है। अब मुझे ĢÌन पूछना है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Before the hon. Minister speaks, मुझे  यह बताते हुए ददर् है। मȅ एक ĢÌन 
क े ऊपर ĢÌनकतार् क े अलावा तीन सदÎ
यȗ को ही मौका दे सकता हूँ। मेरे पास जया जी की िचट 
आई, मȅने िसलेक्शन िकया ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, fix the priority also.  Either keep it first-cum-first-
served 
or otherwise. Let us know. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Digvijaya Singhji, please.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: This is my point of order. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: There is no point of order. ...(Interruptions)... Now, hon. Minister. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी  सी. आर. पािटल : महोदय, मेÇबर ने जो ĢÌन पूछा है, वह गुणवǄा क े संबंध मȂ है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... सुरिक्षत पेयजल Ģदान करने क े िलए 10500 - वषर् 2012 और इसके  बाद क े 
...(Ëयवधान)...     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Digvijaya Singhji, you are a very senior Member. 
...(Interruptions)...  All three have gone but none has gone to that side. 
...(Interruptions)...   All three have gone to
 this side. ...(Interruptions)...  Mukul ji, 
what debate you are…(Interruptions)…  A l l  o f  y o u r  c a r e e r  m u s t  b e  o n  m y  c a r r i e r .   
…(Interruptions)…  Okay, no, no.  …(Interruptions)…  सुिनए, सुिनए ...(Ëयवधान)... Ask 
your question.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on record except what Mr. Shekhar 
says.  Okay, Mr. Shekhar.   
 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  सर, मȅ सबसे पहले मोदी सरकार का आभार Ëयƪ करना चाहता हूं।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  सर, तकलीफ है ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, यह मेरी समझ मȂ नहीं आता है िक मोदी 
जी या गुजरात का नाम सुनते ही पता नहीं इन लोगȗ को सांप क्यȗ सूंघ जाता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
मोदी जी इस द
ेश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  आप सिÃलमȂटरी पूिछए। ...(Ëयवधान)... नीरज जी, सिÃलमȂटरी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : देिखए सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Neeraj ji, don't justify.  …(Interruptions)…  Supplementary! 
…(Interruptions)…  
  
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  मोदी जी का नाम सुनकर इतने उǄेिजत क्यȗ हो जाते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Put your supplementary.  …(Interruptions)…  Put your 
supplementary.  
…(Interruptions)…  नीरज जी, आप मेरी तरफ देिखए और आज खास तौर 
से देिखए।  I am looking fairly attractive today.  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  सर, मȅ जानता हूं।   
 
Ǜी सभापित :  हां, जानते हो न!  और आज मȅ ज्यादा ही अटर्ैिक्टव हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह स
ुरजेवाला : सभापित महोदय,  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  सुरजेवाला जी, अब आपकी ही कमी थी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  सर, मȅ िफर से बोलना शुरू  करता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  आप अपना सिÃलमȂटरी पूिछए।   
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  सर, मȅ पूछ रहा हूं। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  जी, पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  मȅ मोदी सरकार का आभार और अिभनंदन करना चा
हता हूं।  जो काम आजादी 
क े तुरंत बाद होना चािहए था, उसको 70 साल लग गए।  हर घर जल पहुंचाने का काम आजादी 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
43

 
क े तुरंत बाद होना चािहए था।  ...( Ëयवधान)... Îवच्छ पानी पीना सबका अिधकार है और यह 
अिधकार मोदी सरकार दे रही है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आपका ĢÌन क्या है? 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से ĢÌन करना चाहता हूं।  मेरा िजला बिलया है, वहां 
आसȃिनक पानी की समÎया है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : नीरज जी, आप इतनी बड़ी पाटीर् क े सदÎय हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप अपना ĢÌन 
पूिछए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर :  मेरे बिलया िजले मȂ आसȃिनक पानी की समÎया है। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह 
जानना चाहता हूं िक पानी की ग
ुणवǄा, जो हर घर जल जाएगा, उसकी गुणवǄा क े िलए क Ȃ दर् 
और राज्य सरकार क्या कदम उठा रही है? ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Don't force my hands.  …(Interruptions)…  
Renukaji, don't force my hands.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी सी.आर. पािटल: माननीय सभापित जी, माननीय सदÎय जानना चाहते हȅ िक पानी की 
गुणवǄा क ै से सुिनिÌचत होती है और इस संबंध मȂ क्या िकया गया है।  ...(
Ëयवधान)... सुरिक्षत 
पेयजल Ģदान करने क े िलए BIS IS 10500: 2012 और  इसके  बाद क े संशोधनȗ का पालन करने 
की सलाह दी गई है।  आसȃिनक और Äलोराइड स
े Ģभािवत बिÎतयȗ मȂ खाना पकाने और पीने क े 
िलए अÊपकािलक उपाय करने की सलाह राज्यȗ को दी गई है।   दूिषत और जल जिनत रोगȗ से 
छ ुटकारा पाने क े िलए सभी आसȃिनक और Äलोराइड Ģभािवत बिÎतयȗ को सुरिक्षत ǣोत से या 
अÊपकािलक नल या कनेक्शन से पानी िदया जा रहा है।  पेयजल गुणवǄा परीक्षण क े िल
ए 2,157 
जल गुणवǄा परीक्षण Ģयोगशालाओं का एक मान्यता ĢाÃत नेटवकर् उपलÅध है।  सभी राज्यȗ और 
क Ȃ दर् शािसत Ģदेशȗ ने नाममातर् दरȗ पर जनता ǎारा एकितर्त िकए गए पेयजल नमूनȗ क े परीक्षण 
क
े  िलए जल गुणवǄा परीक्षण सुिवधाएं खोल दी हȅ।  देश मȂ मिहलाओं की अगर्णी भूिमका है।  
राज्यȗ ने गर्ाम पंचायतȗ को भी हर Îतर पर एक िकट का उपयोग करते हुए जल ग ुणवǄा परीक्षण 
करने क े िलए Îथानीय समुदाय की पांच मिहलाओं की पहचान की है और उन्हȂ सुिनिÌचत िकया 
है।  अब तक 5.5 लाख से अिधक गांवȗ मȂ 25 लाख से अिधक मिहलाओं को इसकी टर्ेिंनग दी गई 
है।  जल गुणवǄा Ģबंधन सुिवधा Ģणाली िनिÌचत की गई है।  ...(
Ëयवधान)... इस पोटर्ल पर 
Ëयिƪ अपना नमूना पंजीकृ त कर सकता है और पानी क े नमूने की जांच करने क े िलए पास की 
Ģयोगशाला का चयन कर सकता ह
ै।  इस पोटर्ल को उस िंलक पर भी देखा जा सकता है, जो 
हमने िदया हुआ है।  जल आपूिर्त पर भरोसा और िवÌवास बढ़ाने क े िलए जल गुणवǄा परीक्षण क े 
पिरणाम भी िसिटज़न कॉनर्र क े माध्यम से सावर्जिनक रूप  से उपलÅध हȅ।  िसिटज़न कॉनर्र क े 
माध्यम से जेजेएम डैशबोडर् पर भी नागिरक देश
 क े िकसी भी कोने से अपने जल ǣोतȗ और नल से 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
िमलने वाले जल की गुणवǄा क े बारे मȂ जानकारी ĢाÃत कर सकते हȅ और जल गुणवǄा मȂ हो रहे 
बदलाव का अवलोकन कर सकते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : यह  ĢÌन का जवाब है, आपने ĢÌन नहीं सुना।  Very good.  Supplementary 
Question No. 2, Mr. Neeraj, and you should  be satisfied by a very comprehensive 
answer.  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : सर, मȅ तो बधाई देना चाहता हूँ िक मंतर्ी जी पहली बार बोल रहे ह
 ȅ और उन्हȗने 
बहुत अच्छा जवाब िदया।  मेरे ख्याल से सभी लोगȗ को समझ मȂ आ गया होगा। 
 सर, मȅ िफर से मोदी सरकार का अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Second Supplementary. ...(Interruptions)...  No; second 
supplementary. 
 
Ǜी नीरज श
ेखर : सर , वही तो, मȅ अिभनंदन से शुरू  करना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक 2019 क े पहले 
...(Ëयवधान)... * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)...  एक 
सेक ंड।  आप बैिठए, बैिठए, बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैिठए।  बैिठए, बैिठए।  माननीय सदÎय, 
एक सेक ंड। ...(Ëयवधान)... Neerajji, you will force me. ...(Interruptions)...  I may name. 
...(Interruptions)...  Please. ...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... Please; sit 
down. ...(Interruptions)... Sit down. ...(Interruptions)... ऑनरेबल मेÇबसर्, दोनȗ तरफ 
क े नेताओं से मेरा िवशेष आगर्ह है। ...(Ëयवधान)... एक सेक ं ड, सुिनए तो सही। ...(Ëयवधान)... Mr. 
Dangi, sit down. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Dangi, sit down. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. 
Members.  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी : ये सबको टारगेट नहीं कर सकते।  ये िकसी को क ु छ भी कह दȂगे, यह कौन सा 
तरीका है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप  क्या कर रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवध
ान)... मेरा सदन मȂ जो नेतागण हȅ, नेता सदन एवं 
Ģितपक्ष क े नेतागण, मेरा अनुरोध है िक इतनी िगरावट नहीं लानी चािहए।  नेता अपने सदÎयȗ को 
क ंटर्ोल नहीं कर सकते हȅ!  कोई क ु छ भी बोलेगा!  अनुभवी नेता बोलȂगे, खड़े होकर बोलȂगे!  यह 
क ैसा िसÎटम कर िलया है िक बाहर कोई बच्चा भी द
ेखेगा, तो शमर्सार हो जाएगा!  क्वेÌचन 
ऑवर बहुत महत्वपूणर् है।  मेरी हरेक से गुज़ािरश है िक आप अपना ĢÌन पूिछए।  Now, 
Supplementary No. 2, please and look at me. ...(Interruptions)... 
                                         
* Not Recorded 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
45

 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : सर, मेरे बारे मȂ ऐसे कोई कमȂट नहीं कर सकता और करेगा, तो मȅ जवाब देने 
क े लायक हूँ।  मुझे इसके  िलए िकसी का सपोटर् नहीं चािहए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Neerajji, Supplementary No. 2. ...(Interruptions)...  Please. 
Supplementary No. 2.   
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : सर , मȅ िफर से मोदी सरकार का अिभवादन करना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक
  उन्हȗने 
मिहला सशिƪकरण क े िलए जो काम िकया है - ' हर घर जल' से मिहलाओं को सबसे ज्यादा 
फायदा हुआ है।  मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहूँगा िक क्या इन्हȗने कोई सवȃ कराया है, 
क्यȗिक इससे सबसे ज्यादा स
ुिवधा मिहलाओं को हुई है?  2019 से पहले क ेवल 13 फीसदी घरȗ मȂ 
नल से पानी जाता था, अब 78 फीसदी जाता है।  क्या इससे मिहलाओं को कोई फायदा हुआ है, मȅ 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता हूँ? 
 
Ǜी सभापित : 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  मंतर्ी जी ने गित पकड़ ली है।  आपने गित पकड़ ली है।  पहले 
िदन थोड़ा सा होता है। 
 
Ǜी सी.आर. पािटल : महोदय , मȅ तो जवाब को छोटा कर रहा था, तािक समय बच जाए।  यह 
ĢÌनोǄर का समय महत्वपूणर् ह
ै, इसिलए मȅ छोटा जवाब देना चाहता हूँ, मगर ये लोग रोक रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : समय भी महत्वपूणर् है और जल भी महत्वपूणर् है। 
 
Ǜी सी.आर. पािटल : सर, हमारे माननीय सदÎय जानना चाह ते हȅ िक मिहला सशिƪकरण और 
जल जीवन िमशन मȂ क्या सवȃ िकया गया है और उसके  क्या पिरणाम आए हȅ।  आदरणीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी की यह जो योजना बनी है, उसके  पहले से और आज भी, जल क े िवषय मȂ राज्य  सरकार 
का अपना अिधकार भी है और अपना कतर्Ëय भी है, मगर इसमȂ देरी हुई थी।  70 साल तक हर गाँव 
मȂ जो पानी जाना चािहए था, वह नहीं पहुँच पाया, इसिलए क ेन्दर् सरकार की ओर से आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने यह योजना बनाई और इसके  िलए पानी, फ
ं ड और टेिक्नकल सहायता की 
ËयवÎथा की।  गर्ामीण घरȗ मȂ पानी लाने और उसके  इंतजाम की िजÇमेदारी सिदयȗ से माताओं, 
बहनȗ और बेिटयȗ क े ऊपर लादी गई थी।  WHO की एक िरपोटर् क े अनुसार गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
Ģितिदन 5.5 करोड़ घंटे का समय इस कायर् मȂ Ëयथर् हो जाता था, िजसमȂ 75 परस Ȃट समय 
मिहलाओं का होता था।  इनका जो ĢÌन था, इसके  अ
ंदर पहला फायदा मिहलाओं को हुआ।  
इसका िनदान पाने क े िलए हमारे माननीय  Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी ने जल जीवन िमशन की दूरगामी 
योजना शुरू  की थी।  िमशन की शुरुआत  से ही इसमȂ मिहलाओं की अिगर्म भागीदारी िनधार्िरत की 
गई है।  चाहे योजना क े Îतर पर हो या Ģिशक्षण मȂ हो या Îवयं सहायता समूह क े रूप  मȂ हो, हर 
जगह मिहलाओं को Ģाथिमकता दी गई है।  जेजेएम मȂ हमारे गर्ामीणȗ, िवशेषकर मिहलाओं और 
लड़िकयȗ को सशƪ बनाया गया, सभ
ी गर्ाम मȂ जल एवं Îवच्छता सिमितयȗ मȂ कम से कम 50 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
परसȂट मिहलाएँ हȅ।  लगभग 25 लाख मिहलाओं को फीÊड टैिंÎटग िकट का उपयोग करके  पानी 
की गुणवǄा जाँचने का Ģिशक्षण िदया गया है।  जल संयंतर् क े दीघर्कालीन रखरखाव क े Ģशासन, 
पिरचालन हेतु सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुÃस को अगर्णी रूप  से भागीदार बनाने हेतु ... 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  मंतर्ी जी, एक सेक ंड।  माननीय सदÎय, आप बैठे-ब
ैठे बात मत कीिजए।  ये वह पढ़ 
रहे हȅ, जो ĢÌन पूछा गया िक इससे मिहलाओं पर ...( Ëयवधान)... आप पहले सुिनए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुिनए।  ĢÌन यह था िक मिहलाओं पर इसका क्या असर हुआ है और 
जवाब िबÊकु ल उसी दृिÍट स
े है। ...( Ëयवधान)... मंतर्ी जी, आप बोिलए। ...( Ëयवधान)... यह 
मिहलाओं क े िलए जरूरी है। 
 
Ǜी सी.आर. पािटल : सर , जल संयंतर् क े दीघर्कालीन रखरखाव एवं पिरचालन हेत
 ु सेÊफ हेÊप 
गर्ुÃस को अगर्णी रूप  से भागीदार बनाने हेतु राज्यȗ और क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े ǎारा उनका पूरा उपयोग 
िकया गया है।  इस बात पर भी बल िदया गया है िक सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुÃस की मदद की जाए।  चूँिक 
मिहलाओं को रोजाना जल की समÎया का सामना करना होता है, इसिल
ए उस समÎया को हल 
करने क े िलए उनसे मदद ली भी जाए और उनको मदद दी भी जाए।  तो मिहलाओं की सहायता 
भी ली गई है, उनकी ओर से बहुत बड़ी सहायता िमली है।  राज्य सरकारȗ  और क Ȃ दर् सरकार की 
ओर से यह एक बहुत बड़ा काम हुआ है, िजसकी वजह से मिहलाओं का जो 75 परस Ȃट समय 
जाता था, उनको बहुत दूर से, कई िकलोमीटर तक से पानी उठाकर लाना पड़ता था और वह 
पानी भी शुǉ नहीं िमलता था - आज नल से जल देने की वजह से शुǉ पानी, जो िक ट
ैÎटेड है, 
वह पानी उनको िमल रहा है।  ĢÌनकतार् जो कह रहे हȅ,  मȅ उनको भी कहना चाहता हूँ िक 70 
साल तक यह क्यȗ नहीं हुआ, यह ĢÌन भी पूछना चािहए, मगर मोदी साहब न
े इसको अब हल कर 
िदया है।  हम और अच्छा तथा शुǉ पानी देने की कोिशश करȂगे।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Mukul Wasnik, third supplementary question.  
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक : 
 सर, माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय ने बड़े िवÎतार से ' हर घर जल 
योजना' पर सवाल का जवाब िदया, लेिकन दुभार्ग्य इस बात का है िक इससे लोगȗ की Ãयास नहीं 
बुझती।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप सÃलीमȂटरी क्वेÌचन पूिछए।  
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक : सर, मȅ जो जानना चाहता हूँ, वह म
 ȅ संक्षेप मȂ पूछू ँगा। 
 मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक क्या यह हकीकत है िक आज भी 5 
करोड़ से अिधक घरȗ मȂ इस योजना क े जिरए पीने का पानी नहीं पहुँचा है? क्या यह हकीकत है 
िक झारखंड मȂ महज 47 फीसदी घरȗ तक ही इस योजना से जल पहुँचा है, राजÎथान मȂ महज 45 
फीसदी घरȗ तक ही जल पहुँचा है और बंगाल मȂ िसफर् 40 फीसदी घरȗ तक ही जल पहुँचा है?  
  
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
47

 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक : अगर यह हकीकत है, तो इन राज्यȗ मȂ और वे तमाम घर, जहाँ पर 
आज तक इस योजना क े जिरए जल नहीं पहुँचा है, उसकी ËयवÎथा कब तक होगी, क्यȗिक इस 
योजना क े जिरए 2024 तक यह काम पूरा होना था? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you Mukulji. 
 
Ǜी सी.आर. पािटल : सर, यह योजना जब बनी, तब से जो समय बीता है, उसके  अ
ंतगर्त टोटल 
19 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ पानी - यहाँ पर 19 करोड़ घर हȅ।  अभी दो साल क े अन्दर सरकार की ओर से 
साढ़े 6 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ पानी िदया गया है।  ऐसी योजना 70 सालȗ मȂ कभी भी नहीं आई थी।  इस 
योजना क े िलए दो साल मȂ ही इतना बड़ा फ ं ड देने क े साथ, सरकार ने वह गर्ांट देकर राज्य 
सरकार का जो बोझ था, वह भी हÊका िकया है।  इसके  अन्दर जो गाँव क े लोग ह ȅ, उनको जो 
पानी िमलता था - चूँिक पानी से ही सबसे ज्यादा रोग भी होते हȅ, तो शुǉ जल नहीं िमलने क े 
कारण आरोग्य की सेवाओं मȂ राज्य सरकार का जो खचर् होता था, उसमȂ भी बहुत कमी आई है।  
इससे उनकी सेहत भी अच्छी हो गई है, उनके  बच्चȗ को भी अच्छा पानी िमल रहा है और इसके  
चलते बचपन से ही उनक
ा बच्चा पोिषत हो रहा है।   ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने आपको बताया िक 70 
सालȗ मȂ जो नहीं कर पाए थे, हम 2 साल क े अन्दर साढ़े 6 करोड़ घरȗ म
Ȃ पानी पहुँचा चुक े हȅ।  जो 
बाकी हȅ, उनके  अन्दर - यह राज्य सरकार का काम है, क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से उनको टेिक्नकल 
सहायता और फ ं ड िदया जाता है।  वह उनको पूरा िदया जा रहा है।  सभी राज्य सरकारȗ ने अपना 
टȂडर जारी कर िदया है।  उनके  अपने िकसी न िकसी कारण से यह काम थोड़ा Îलो था, मȅने अभी 
सभी राज्यȗ क े मुख्यमंितर् यȗ और मंितर्यȗ क े साथ भी मीिंटग की है और उनको भी कहा है िक अगर 
आपको और भी कोई ĢॉÅलम हो, तो बताइए, परन्तु इस काम को जÊदी से पूरा करȂ।  आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी उसके  िलए भी बहुत िचिन्तत हȅ और यह पूरी योजना जÊदी से लागू हो, उसके  िलए 
पूरा Ģेस भी कर रहे हȅ।  आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ राज्य
 सरकारȂ अगर जÊदी से अपना काम पूरा करȂगी, 
तो सबको नल से जल िमल जाएगा, शुǉ जल िमल जाएगा।  
 
Ǜी अशोकराव शंकरराव चËहाण
 : सभापित महोदय, जल जीवन िमशन क े तहत यह जो 'हर घर 
जल' का काम हो रहा है, यह पूरे देश मȂ हो रहा है और कई राज्यȗ मȂ अच्छा काम हो रहा है, इसमȂ 
िकसी को संदेह नहीं है।  अभी इस सदन क े दोनȗ तरफ से इस िवषय पर जो चचार् हुई है, उसमȂ 
Îपीडी इिÇÃलमȂटेशन का इÌयू ह
ै, िजसके  ऊपर गंभीरता से देखने की आवÌयकता है - ऐसा मȅ 
मानता हूँ।  पहले इस संबंध मȂ फोकÎड अĢोच और रािश की उपलÅधता बहुत बड़ा इÌयू था, 
लेिकन आज इस मद मȂ 90 परसȂट पैसा गवनर्मȂट ऑफ इंिडया देती है और िसफर् 10 परसȂट राज्य 
सरकार को देना होता है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What is your supplementary? 
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी अशोकराव शंकरराव चËहाण : सभापित महोदय, मȅ महाराÍटर् की बात इसिलए कह रहा हूँ 
क्यȗिक वहाँ काम हो रहा है, लेिकन िजस गित से काम होने की आवÌयकता है, उस गित से काम 
नहीं हो रहा है।  इसमȂ इिÇÃलमȂटेशन का समय कहीं साल भर का है, कहीं डेढ़ साल का है, लेिकन 
दो-दो साल िनकल गए और िजस Îपीड से काम होना चािहए, वह नहीं हो रहा ह
ै।  उसमȂ जो 
इÌयूज़ हȅ, वे हȅ िक आपने इसके  िलए external audit agencies लगाई हȅ, estimates बनाने क े 
िलए agencies लगाई हȅ।  इसमȂ जो private agencies लगी हȅ, उनसे िजस तरीके  से काम करना 
अपेिक्षत
 है, वे उस तरीके  से काम नहीं करती हȅ, इसीिलए इसके  अमल होने मȂ िदक्कतȂ आ रही हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What is your supplementary?  
 
Ǜी अशोकराव शंकरराव चËहाण : सभापित महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से माननीय म
 ंतर्ी महोदय से 
हमारी यह माँग है िक वे इस Îकीम क े इिÇÃलमȂटेशन का िरËयू करȂ और Îटेट गवनर्मȂट्स से उसमȂ 
ध्यान देने क े िलए कहȂ। 
दूसरी, िजन private agencies को काम िदया गया है, अगर वे काम नहीं करती हȅ, तो 
उनके  ऊपर एक्शन लȂ और समय क े अंदर इस काम को पूरा करȂ तथा उसको रािश उपलÅध 
करवाएं।   
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल :  महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने बहुत ही अच्छा ĢÌन िकया
 है।  मȅ यह बताना 
चाहता हूँ  िक इस संबंध मȂ िसफर् महाराÍटर् ही नहीं, बिÊक सभी राज्यȗ क े संब
ंिधत मंतर्ी या मुख्य 
मंतर्ी तथा उनके  अिधकािरयȗ क े साथ िरËयू मीिंटग भी हो गई है।  महाराÍटर् क े संबंिधत मंतर्ी ने हमȂ 
कहा है िक हम बहुत जÊद ही उसको पूणर् करȂगे।  क ेन्दर् सरकार क े यहाँ इससे संबंिधत
 कोई भी 
काम पȂिंडग नहीं है और सभी राज्यȗ ने अपना टȂडिंरग का काम भी खत्म कर िदया है।  डीआई 
पाईप आिद मैटीिरयÊस क े भाव बढ़ने क े कारण कई कांटर्ेक्टसर् को जो ĢॉÅलÇस थीं, उसकी भी 
पूिर्त राज्
य सरकार करे - ऐसा हमने उसको बता िदया है और काम को जÊदी से आगे बढ़ाने क े 
िलए कहा है।  हमने कहा है िक जो अत्यंत आधुिनक टेक्नोलॉजी ह ै, उसका उपयोग करके  पहले 
यह चेक करे िक पानी कहाँ है और िफर वहीं पर बोर करे, वहीं सबमिर्सबल लगाए और वहीं सोलर 
भी लगाए, तािक पावर नहीं होने क े कारण पानी नहीं िमलने की समÎया नहीं हो।  हमने यह भी 
कहा है िक ओवर हेड ट
ंकी की क्वािलटी भी अच्छी होनी चािहए।   कई जगहȗ पर जो बहुत पुअर 
काम हुआ था, उसको भी िरवाइज़ करने क े िलए कहा गया है।  अभी भी बहुत अच्छी टेक्नोलॉजी 
क े साथ रेडीमेड टȅक बनता है।  सभी राज्यȗ को उसका भी उप
योग करने क े िलए कहा गया है।  
अभी क ेन्दर् सरकार क े Îतर पर कोई भी काम बाकी नहीं है।  अब इिÇÃलमȂटȂशन का काम राज्य 
सरकार का ही है और राज्य सरकार इिÇÃलमȂटȂशन का काम कर रही है।  हम सभी राज्यȗ क े साथ 
इस िवषय मȂ बात करके  उसको फॉलोअप भी कर रहे ह
ȅ।  हमने भी इसके  िलए एक टाÎक फोसर् 
बनाई है, जो राज्यȗ मȂ जाकर िविजट करती है, सवȃ करती है और टेक्नोलॉिजकल सहायता भी 
करती है।     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, fifth supplementary; Shri Raghav Chadha. 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
49

 
Ǜी राघव चǀा :  सर, इस सरकार ने काफी धूमधाम से 'हर घर जल' योजना की शुरुआत  की थी 
और वादा िकया था िक वषर् 2022 आते-आते गर्ामीण इलाकȗ मȂ हर घर  को 'हर घर जल' योजना 
क े तहत नल से पानी िमलेगा।  वषर् 2023 मȂ इसी राज्य सभा क े सदन क े पटल पर माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी ने जवाब देते हुए यह बताया िक गर्ामीण इलाके  क
े  मातर् 52 Ģितशत घर ऐसे हȅ, िजन तक आज 
नल से जल पहुँचा है।     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What is your supplementary?  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा :  सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक आज वषर् 
2024 आ गया है और आपने वषर् 2022 तक 'हर घर जल' योजना क े तहत नल से जल देने का 
वादा िकया था, तो आज का इस संबंध मȂ क्या आँकड़ा है?  द ूसरा, हम अभी 20 करोड़  rural 
households मȂ से आधा मȂ ही यह कर पाए हȅ, अचीव कर पाए हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Your supplementary, Mr. Chadha? 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा :  सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक हम अभी 
भी हर घर नल से जल देने मȂ इतने बुरे तरीके  से क्यȗ िवफल
 रहे हȅ?  
 
 Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल :  महोदय, हमने पहले भी बताया िक जल देना राज्य सरकार की िजÇमेदारी 
है।  उसे अपने फ ं ड से यह काम करना था और 70 साल तक क ेन्दर् सरकार ने कभी भी इस मद मȂ 
उसको आिर्थक मदद नहीं की, िजस
के  कारण यह काम नहीं हो रहा था।  पहली बार आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा उसके  िलए बजट मȂ अलग से 2,04,000 करोड़ रुपए  की बड़ी रकम की 
ËयवÎथा की गई।  इसके  कारण इस काम मȂ Îपीड भी आई है। आप देख सकते हȅ िक आकांक्षी 
िजलȗ मȂ नल जल योजना को Ģाथिमकता दी गई और उनकी कवरेज, जो िक अगÎत, 2019 तक 
28.38 लाख थी, यानी िसफर् 7.8 परसȂट थी, वह बढ़कर अब 211.25 लाख, यानी 77.10 परसȂट हो 
गई है।  इस Ģकार, इसके  अंदर इतनी Ģोगर्ेस हुई है िक यह 7 परसȂट से 77 परसȂट तक बढ़ी है।  
अगÎत, 2019 से लेकर िफलहाल तक इसकी कवरेज, जो 8 लाख से ऊपर बढ़ी है, वह राज्य 
सरकारȗ की सिकर्य भागीदारी से ही संभव हुई है।  जेजेएम ने गांवȗ मȂ जाित, समुदाय और ऊ ँ च-
नीच की मानिसकता को तोड़ा है, क्यȗिक यह एक समावेशी योजना है और िबना िकसी भेदभाव क े 
Ģत्येक गर्ामीण घरȗ मȂ गुणवǄा क े आधार पर इसके  अंतगर्त पानी िदया जाता है।  जलापूिर्त राज्य 
का िवषय है और जेजेएम क े तहत सभी जलापूिर्त योजनाओं क े िडजाइन, योजना आिद को 
कायार्िन्वत करने की िजÇमेदारी उन पर है।  भारत सरकार उन्हȂ िवǄीय और तकनीकी सहायता 
Ģदान करती है, उसका फॉलो अप करती है और उसकी मॉिनटिंरग भी करती है।  आपने जो 
अपेक्षा की है, उसकी तरफ राज्य सरकारȂ बहुत तेजी से बढ़ रही हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The next supplementary is from Ms. Dola Sen; I am allowing her.  
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Sir, I did not give my name. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I have given my name. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Look at my indulgence.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Sir, I have given my name for Q. No. 3 regarding coal mines. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You do not want to raise on this? 
 
MS. DOLA SEN: No, Sir. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, she did not submit, I submitted. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I thought you were interested as  you were raising your hands. 
...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, one minute. ...(Interruptions)... When I find 
that on a Question, one hon. Member is  raising hands, I hope to accommodate. 
...(Interruptions)... We will come to that.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No.3. 
   
  
*Q. No. 3. [The questioner was absent.]  
 
Boosting domestic supply of critical minerals 
 
*3. SHRI JAGGESH: Will the Minister of MINES be pleased to state: 
 
(a) Whether it is a fact that the count ry relies heavily on imports for meeting its 
requirement for critical minerals;  
(b) Whether Government has begun work on a new policy to promote exploration 
and processing of critical minerals in the country;  
(c) Whether the proposed new policy incl udes incentives at each stage of the 
production process; and 
(d) If so, the details thereof, and other m easures initiated by Government to boost 
domestic supply of critical minerals? 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
51

 
 
THE MINISTER OF MINES (SHRI G. KISHAN REDDY): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid 
on the Table of the House. 
  
Statement 
 
(a)  Yes, India relies on imports to meet it s requirement of critical minerals and 
imports minerals like lithium, cobalt, nickel, phosphorus, potash etc. 
  
(b) to (d)  The Central Government has amended the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1 957 through the MMDR Amendment Act, 2023 
with effect from 17.08.2023. Through the said amendment, the Central Government 
has been empowered to exclusively auctio n mining lease and composite licence for 
24 critical and strategic minerals listed in the Part-D of the First Schedule to the said 
Act.  
 Ministry of Mines, Government of India has successfully auctioned 14 blocks of 
critical and strategic minerals. 
 Besides auction of critical minerals by the Central Government, in order to 
further boost exploration of critical and deep-seated minerals, a new mineral 
concession namely, Exploration Licence ha s been introduced for 29 deep-seated 
minerals mentioned in the newly inserted Seventh Schedule to the MMDR Act.   The 
exploration licence granted through auctio n shall permit the licencee to undertake 
reconnaissance and prospecting operations fo r these minerals on receipt of revenue 
share once mining starts in the explored blocks. 
 Ministry has given thrust on the enha ncement of the exploration program for 
the critical minerals. Accord ingly, during the last thre e years (2021- 22 to 2023-24), 
GSI had taken up 368 mineral exploration pr ojects on various critical and strategic 
minerals. During the current FS 2024-25, GSI has taken up 196  mineral exploration 
projects to assess the mineral potential of various critical and strategic minerals 
across the country. 
 Since inception of National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET), a total 393 
projects have been funded by  NMET. Out of 393 projects, 1 22 projects are of critical 
minerals through various exploration agencies.  
 In order to encourage private participat ion in exploration, Ministry of Mines has 
notified 22 private exploration agencies (NPEAs). These agencies are taking up 
exploration projects through NMET. 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 National Mineral Exploration Trust (NME T) has issued two schemes for partial 
reimbursement of exploration expenses for holders of Composite Licences and 
Exploration licences. Under these Schemes, upto 50% of the exploration expenditure 
incurred by the licence holders are reimbursed.  
 In 2023, enlarging the scope of the S&T program “Promotion of Research and 
Innovation in Start-ups and MSMEs in mi ning, mineral processing, metallurgy and 
recycling sector (S&T-PRISM) ” was introduced to fund research and innovation in 
starts up and MSME to bridge the gap between R&D and commercialisation. During 
2024, under R&D Component of Science and Technology Programme of Ministry of 
Mines, 10 R & D Projects related to extract ion, recovery and recycling of critical 
minerals have been approved for taking up through various Indian Institutes and 
research laboratories.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, the Ministry in the last many months has conducted 
three rounds of auctions for critical mineral blocks.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask your supplementary. 
 
Ǜी साके त गोखले : सर, वे अिभवादन करते हȅ, मȅ अपना क्वैÌचन इंटर्ोǹूस तो करू ँ! In 
November, 2023, auctions were launched for 20 critical mineral blocks, of these, only 
6 blocks have been auctioned because of la ck of interest of bidders. In February and 
March, 2024, in two auctions, 18 critical mineral blocks... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Gokhale, there is a mechanism. 
 
Ǜी साके त गोखले : ठीक है, सर।  70 सालȗ मȂ क ु छ नहीं हुआ था, क्या अब मȅ सवाल पूछू ँ? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : One minute. This is for benefit of everyone. When a Question is 
asked, the Minister lays its reply on the Ta ble of the House.  The Members have to go 
through that reply and then ask the supplementary related to that question. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKALE: Sir, it is related to critical mineral blocks only. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask the supplementary. 
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
53

 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, he is praising the Prime Minister; I do not even get to 
introduce my question. Sir, if the question is irrelevant, you may dismiss it, but let me 
finish it at least. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You can praise your Chief Minister. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : No, I want to ask a question, I am not here for praising 
anybody. I am here to ask a question for the people. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask your supplementary. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: My Chief Minister does not need praise here. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask your supplementary. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I would like to ask specifically and I would like a specific 
answer. What is the reason for lack of inte rest from bidders for auctions of critical 
mineral blocks and what are the steps bein g taken to encourage interest of bidders 
for critical mineral blocks which are going un-auctioned? In three auctions, there was 
no interest from bidders.  Why is that happening? 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : चेयरमैन सर, 2014 मȂ सुĢीम कोटर् क े आदेश पर आज भारत सरकार 
पारदिर्शता क े साथ इस िमनरÊस और माइंस को ओपन ऑक्शन मȂ लोगȗ को दे रही है।  हम 
Îटाटर्अप क ंपनीज़ को दे रहे हȅ, एमएसएमईज़ को दे रहे हȅ और जो इंटरेÎटेड िबग क ंपनीज़ हȅ, 
उनको भी दे रहे हȅ। िमनरÊस मȂ अभी हम हैक ेथन कर रहे हȅ। हम रोड शोज़ कर रहे हȅ, लोगȗ क े 
पास Îवयं जाकर मीिंटग कर रहे हȅ। हमने िफक्की जैसी संÎथाओं क े साथ मीिंटग करके  लोगȗ की 
भागीदारी सुिनिÌचत करने का Ģयास िकया। अभी दो िदन पहले ही 8 नए critical minerals का 
ऑक्शन करके  लोगȗ को allotment letters दे च
ुक े हȅ। भारत सरकार critical minerals पर  देश 
ही नहीं, बिÊक िवदेशȗ मȂ भी काम करने का Ģयास कर रही है। मȅ आपकी दृिÍट मȂ यह लाना चाहता 
हूं िक in the last three year s 2021-22, 2022- 23, 2023-24 तक जीएसआई न
े critical 
strategic minerals पर 368 minerals exploration projects शुरू  िकये हȅ। इसी िवǄीय वषर् 
2024-25 क े दौरान जीएसआई ने 196 mine exploration projects को शुरू  िकया है, वैसे ही 
National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET) की Îथापना क े ǎारा 393 Ģोजेक्ट्स को 
exploration and financial assistance दी है। 393 Ģोजेक्ट्स मȂ 122 Ģोजेक्ट्स critical minerals 
क े ह
ȅ। हम भारत सरकार की तरफ से इसमȂ लोगȗ की भागीदारी सुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए पूरा 
Ģयास कर रहे हȅ। 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ǜी राजीव शुक्ला। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : सर, जैसा िक आपको पता है िक जब कोल ऑक्शन को लेकर, कोल माइन्स क े 
ऑक्शन को लेकर हंगामा हुआ था, उसके  बाद जब यह सरकार आई, तब नई सरकार ने कहा 
िक... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : राजीव शुक्ला जी, आप बहुत अनुभवी सदÎय हȅ, आप सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : सर, मȅ सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन ही पूछ रहा हूं। तो आमूलचूल पिरवतर्न करने क े िलए 
इन्हȗने एक ऑक्शन िकया। उसके  बाद एक सेल
 ैक्ट किमटी बनी, िजसका मेÇबर मȅ भी थी। मȅ मंतर्ी 
जी से यह पूछना चाहता हूं िक सरकार ने वषर् 2014 क े बाद जो कोल ऑक्शन कराए थे, उनमȂ से 
िकतनी माइन्स चल रही हȅ और क्या यह सही है िक आपको ज़बरदÎत कोयला इÇपोटर् करना पड़ 
रहा ह
ै? हमारा foreign exchange उसमȂ जा रहा है, क्यȗिक तमाम माइन्स मȂ लोगȗ ने Îटे ले 
िलया है, अभी शुरुआत  ही नहीं हुई है, तो ऑक्शन ऐसा था िक उससे कोई फायदा नहीं हुआ, 
बिÊक हमȂ कोल इÇपोटर् करना पड़ रहा है, तो हम िकतना कोल इÇपोटर् कर रहे हȅ, िकतने 
िबिलयन डॉलर का इÇपो
टर् कर रहे हȅ, यह आप बताइए।  
 
Ǜी जी . िकशन रेƿी :  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, यह ĢÌन माइन्स का है, कोल का नहीं है, 
लेिकन आपने आदेश िदया है तो ...(Ëयवधान)... यह कोल का ĢÌन नहीं है, यह िसफर् मा
इन्स का 
critical minerals का ĢÌन है, आप अगर आदेश दȂगे, तो मȅ उसका जवाब देने क े िलए तैयार हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : मंतर्ी जी, राजीव शुक्ला जी अपने िवषय को लेकर आपके  कक्ष म Ȃ आएंगे, तब आप 
इनके  ĢÌन का िनराकरण कीिजएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवड़ा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Rajeevji, it is critical minerals. ...(Interruptions)...Shri Milind Deora. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA: Sir, the question is... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :   Hon. Members, the question pert ains to ‘critical minerals’, not 
‘minerals.’ It is about critical minerals.  Shri Milind Deora. Go ahead. 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA: Sir, the hon. Member is correct that this is a very critical 
question since it pertains to critical minerals.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
55

 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA : Sir, in the reply, the hon. Minister has spoken about 
many critical minerals, including lithium, cobalt, nickel, phosphorus and potash.   
What is very important to note is that lithium, in particular, is a mineral which goes into 
every battery that is used for all products that we use, from  mobile phones to electric 
cars.  China, today, Sir, controls the en tire supply chain of lithium. Exploration and 
manufacturing happens in many parts of the world, but the processing is done in 
China.  Sir, India has become today Atmanirbhar in manufacturing of mobile phones.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ask your supplementary. 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA : And, it is very, very critical for us to become 
Atmanirbhar also in the processing of lithium.  My very pointed question to the hon. 
Minister is that, very recently, a very large deposit of almost 6 m illion tons of lithium 
discovered in the Jammu region.  When does the Government plan to begin mining of 
lithium in that region, keeping in mind th e eco-sensitivities and ecological balance of 
that region?  Thank you. 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : सभापित महोदय, िलिथयम क े बारे मȂ जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ जीएसआई क े ǎारा 
क ु छ िडपॉिजट्स को आइडȂिटफाई िकया गया है और जÇमू-कÌमीर Îटेट गवनर्मȂट से िमलकर 
उसके  ऊपर पैसे खचर् करके  exploration का काम शुरू  िकया है।  िजतना जÊदी हो सके , तो 
exploration complete होने क े बाद एक्शन करके  िलिथयम िनकालने का काम जोरदार तरीके  से 
चल रहा है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित :
 क्वेÌचन नंबर 4.  
 
Implementation status of assurances given in Parliament 
 
*4. SHRI RYAGA KR
ISHNAIAH: Will the Minister of PARL IAMENTARY AFFAIRS be 
pleased to state:- 
 
(a) the number of assurances given by Mi nisters in Parliament, session-wise, in 
the last three years; 
(b) whether the government has devi sed any mechanism for ensuring 
implementation of these assurance; 
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(d) whether there is any time-bond system for preventing delays in implementation 
of these assurances; and 
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): (a) to (e) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
  
Statement 
 
(a) The number of assurances given by Ministers in Parliament, session-wise, in the 
last three years; are enclosed as annexure A. 
 
(b) to (e) It is stated that  the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs has devised a software 
called Online Assurance Monitoring System (OAMS) and ID and Password have been 
provided to all Ministries. They can upload Implemented Reports, make requests of 
dropping and seek extensions for fulfilment of Assurances on this portal which also 
contains necessary instructions regarding timely implementation of Assurances. 
 Assurances are required to be fulfilled within a period of three months from the 
date of assurance. 
 The Ministry of Parliamentary Af fairs keep on reminding all the 
Ministries/Departments, from time to time, regarding expeditious fulfilment of pending 
assurances, from the level of Minister an d higher officers. Hon’ble Minister of 
Parliamentary Affairs reminded on 03.02.2 022 to all Ministers to fulfil pending 
assurances at the earliest an d subsequently reminders were issued on 16.06.2022 & 
01.08.2022 at the level of Additional Secretary and on 25.1 0.2022, 23.01.2023, 
31.07.2023 & 18.03.2024 at the level of Secretary to all Mini stries/Departments. 
Further a review was also taken by Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal, MOS in the meeting with 
Secretaries and Senior Officers from Minist ries/Departments on 06.07.2022. Besides 
this, auto generated reminders are bein g sent every month to the concerned 
Ministries/ Departments through this system. 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
57

 
 
 
Annexure - A 
YEAR AND SESSION WISE LIST 
 
                       2021 
 
Session Total No. Assurances 
253 120 
254 105 
255 25 
 
2022 
 
Session Total No. Assurances 
256 221 
257 70 
258 95 
 
2023 
 
Session Total No. Assurances 
259 118 
260 99 
261 SPECIAL SESSION (NO ASSURANCE) 
262 60 
 
SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH : Mr. Chairman, Sir, during the last three years, the hon. 
Minister had given a number of assurances in different Sessions of Parliament.  Has 
the Government devised any mechanism for ensuring the implementation of these 
assurances?  At the same time, at the time of bifurcation of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh, the Government had given so many assurances.  But, no assurance has yet 
been fulfilled.   
 
DR. L. MURUGAN:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, hon. Member  has asked about the system of 
disposal of the assurances.  In the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, we have an online 
assurance monitoring system.  In this onli ne monitoring system, we have given IDs 
and passwords to all the Ministries.  They can login online and update the 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
implementation of the assurances and they  can also monitor whether the assurances 
have been implemented or not.  
 
SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, there was higher pendency in the 16th 
Lok Sabha.  There is cumulative pendency  of the assurances pertaining to 232th 
Session and 248th to 258th Sessions of the Rajya Sabha.  It comes to 6.8 per cent to 
45 per cent respectively.  
 
DR. L. MURUGAN :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the hon. House may appreciate the way the 
Ministry is implementing assurances.  From 1956 to 2024, the implementation of 
assurances has been 99.07 per cent; whereas, in Lok Sabha it has been 99.43 per 
cent.  During the last three years, under th e leadership of hon. Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi, all the offices conducted a special campaign for the disposal of the 
assurances.  And, due to that, we have achieved this percentage.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the hon. Mini ster has, of course, read out 
what has already been given in the reply.  The assurances, which are given on the 
floor of the House, are required to be fulfille d within three months from the date of the 
assurance given.  As per the statement given by the Ministry, in the year 2021, 250 
assurances were given.  In 2022, 386 assurances were given; in 2023, 268 assurances 
were given. Would the hon. Minister enlight en the House with the details as to how 
many of them have been fulfilled within three months and how many of them are 
pending.  I want breakup details.   
 
DR. L. MURUGAN: Sir, I have the break-up, which I will provide to the hon. Member.  
In the last three years, the total number of assurances given was 913.  And, in the last 
three years, the number of assurances  implemented was 583 and the pending 
assurances are 330.  Sir, an assurance has to  be fulfilled within three months.  Some 
of the assurances could not be fulfilled in time because of policy issues or because 
they required some amendments, etc.  So, their time was extended. The Committee 
on Government Assurances extends the time from time to time. Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: सभापित महोदय, आपकी मेहरबानी क े िलए िदल से धन्यवाद। आप हमारे 
अिधकारȗ क े रक्षक हो। जब हाउस मȂ कोई एÌयोरȂस िदया जाता है... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप सÃलीमȂटर्ी सवाल प
ूिछए।  
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
59

 
 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: सर, मȅ इसी क े ऊपर आ रहा हूं। जब हाउस मȂ कोई एÌयोरȂस िदया जाता 
है, तो उसका वेटेज काफी बढ़ जाता है, इस बात को हम सब जानते हȅ और इसीिलए 
Parliamentary Practices and Procedures मȂ  हाउस मȂ िदए गए एÌयोरȂस क े ऊपर गंभीरता से 
बात ली जाती है।  
 सर, मेरा एक छोटा सा सवाल आपके  जिरए से यही है िक इसी हाउस मȂ, इसी टेन्योर मȂ, 
िजसका िक क्वेÌचन िलखा है, इसी टेन्योर मȂ, मेरा एक सवाल था िक क्या एम.पीज़, एमएलएज़ 
जब मंितर्यȗ को लेटर िलखते हȅ, उसका टाइमबाउंड िरÃलाई और टाइमबाउंड िडटेÊड िरÃलाई 
देन
े क े Ģावधान का क्या कोई आदेश हुआ है, इसका एÌयोरȂस था ‘yes’,  हमने कहा िक उनके  
जबाव नहीं िमलते हȅ, तो एÌयोरȂस था िक अब से जबाव िमलȂगे। मȅ जानना चाहता हूं िक उस 
एÌयोरȂस का क्या हुआ?  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े यहां पर खत िलखा जाता है, कोई िरÃलाई नहीं, 
मंितर्यȗ को खत िलखा जाता है, कोई िरÃलाई नहीं
। मȅ यह जानना चाहता हूं िक जब चुन े हुए 
Ģितिनिधयȗ क े िलए आपका खुद का आदेश है, जो एÌयोरȂस हाउस मȂ िदया गया था, उसका 
Îटेटस क्या है?  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Shaktisinh Gohil, just a minute.  You are required to ask in specific 
terms that you wrote a communication, but th at has not been replied.  You want an 
answer without spelling out facts.   Ask direct. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL: Sir, I have given the facts.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Which facts have you given? 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL: Sir, that was my question.   In my question…. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Shaktisinhji, फ ैक्ट यह होता है िक एक संसद सदÎय ने यह पतर् इस 
तार
ीख को िलखा, उसका जबाव नहीं आया।   It is not a place to make a general remark.  
Now, hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, जो सवाल माननीय सदÎय ने िकया है, वह वैसे तो संबंिधत है, लेिकन 
हम सबको पता है िक पािर्लयामȂट क े अंदर जो हम जबाव देते हȅ और जो एÌयोरȂस देत
 े हȅ, इनका 
एक अलग Îतर होता है और जब आप मंतर्ी को, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को पतर् िलखते हȅ, तो उसका Îतर 
अलग होता है। उसके  बारे मȂ मुझे यहां पर िडटेल मȂ एक्सÃलेन करने की जरूरत नहीं है।  
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: आपने एÌयोरȂस िदया था।  
 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: अगर आप खुद जबाव दȂगे, तो िफर हम क्या जबाव दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)...  Sir, 
let me be very categorical because we mu st put the record very straight.  The 
commitment or the assurance given are not pa rt of the parliamentary proceedings, let 
us not confuse that.  As a matter of courte sy, why only Minister, any letter written to 
any office must be normally replied, must be  responded.  That is a court esy.   But  
there is no bounden rule or regulation th at a personal letter has to be replied. 
But,…(Interruptions)..  जब मȅ आपको बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से, अच्छे भाव क े साथ बता रहा हूं, 
िफर बीच मȂ इस तरह से टोकना ठीक नहीं है। दूसरा, अगर आपने लेटर िलखा है और सदन मȂ 
assurance िदया है, आप मुझे वह पतर् िदखाइए, जहां तक मेरी knowledge मȂ है, इस तरह का 
personal लेटर जो office मȂ िलखते हȅ, उसका जबाव देने का assurance िदया
 है, यह बात मेरी 
knowledge मȂ नहीं है। …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One minute.  The hon. Member has in categorical terms asserted 
that the question was framed on a fact situation, which the hon. Member has to 
substantiate during the course of the day.  Now, Dr. John Brittas.          
                                                                   
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I would be very factual and I would be very precise and 
base my question on the documents available on Rajya Sabha Websites.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now ask your supplementary.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, my supplementary is that since it involves the prestige of the 
House and also the Chair, it has been noted that 17 assurances given to me 
overwhelmingly have not been responded to. And the second facet is that the Special 
Mentions raised here need to be
 responded by the Ministers which most of them are 
… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Don’t deviate. Don’t deviate.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: So, my question, specific question, to the hon. Minister is that if 
the concerned Minister is unable to fulfil th e assurance, will there be a mechanism to 
write to the concerned Member within three months?  
 
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU : I welcome this question as well as the suggestion. We have a 
mechanism which is put into place, and the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, 
Shri L. Murugan, has already given an exhausti ve answer; and it is in the record also.  
When it comes to the Special Mention, Calli ng Attention or matters raised under Zero 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
61

 
 
 
Hour, or, for that matter, under any other ru les, I also personally feel, and, as a 
Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, I assure that these are to be responded well on time.  
But as far as the Government assurances, wh ich are given, are to be fulfilled within 
three months’ period, and, subsequently, if there are certain reasons which have 
prevented in fulfilling the assurance within  three months, then extension of the 
assurance is sought.  That is a parliamentary system. There are ce rtain things in the 
functioning of the Government which resu lt in not fulfilling the assurances.  So, 
extension is always a provision not only in  India but also in all the parliamentary 
democracies in the world. Yesterday in th e all-party meeting also, this matter was 
raised by many of the floor leaders that the Zero Hour or Calling Attention and other 
issues must be responded on time. I will, definitely, convey this matter to all the 
respective hon. Ministers. Thank you.      
                                                     
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question No. 5.  Shri C.Ve. Shanmugam.  
Hon. Members, for information, when ever I say, Question No., the hon. 
Member has to rise and only say, ‘Question No.’ So, say, Question No.  
 
SHRI C.Ve. SHANMUGAM: Question No. 5  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes.  Now, Hon. Minister.  
 
Greenfield Airport at Hosur, Tamil Nadu 
 
*5.  SHRI C. VE. SHANMUGAM :  Will the Minister of CIVI L AVIATION be pleased to 
state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that Government  has decided to set up a new greenfield 
airport at Hosur, Tamil Nadu; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; 
(c) the details relating to the proposed site  of the greenfield airport, the proposals 
regarding land acquisition for this purpose, the distance from Hosur town, the 
expenditure expected to be incurred an d allocated for the propose in this 
financial year, etc.? 
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU) : (a) to 
(c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  Government of India (GoI) has no t received any proposal for 'Site 
Clearance' under Greenfield Airports Policy,  2008 from State Government of Tamil 
Nadu (GoTN) or any Airport Developer for construction of a Greenfield Airport at 
Hosur, Tamil Nadu. 
 
(c) Does not arise. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary one. Mr. Shanmugam.  
 
SHRI C.Ve. SHANMUGAM : Mr. Chairman, Sir, the hon. Minister has stated that the 
Government of India had not received any pr oposal from Government of Tamil Nadu 
contrary to the claims made by Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu.   I would like to state that 
there are some doubts about the non-co nsideration of the proposal at Hosur 
Greenfield Airport because the concession agreement signed between the Centre and 
the Bangalore International Airport Limited contains a clause against setting up a new 
Greenfield Airport within an aerial distance of  150 kilometres radius till 2033 for the 
benefit of industrial contractor, ignoring the industrial development of Tamil Nadu. Mr. 
Chairman, Sir, I would like to know whethe r the Government of India would consider 
setting up a Greenfield airport at Hosur cons idering the industrial development that is 
taking place in and around Hosur.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Good. Hon. Minister.  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Hon. Chairman, Sir, first of all, I would like to 
start with a comment which you have made  saying, ‘You are looking very attractive 
today.’  I agree, Sir.  No doubt about it. Bu t what is also looking attractive today is 
‘Civil Aviation.’  Out of 15 questions that are listed today, the Starred Questions, 9 of 
them are from Civil Aviation.  …(Interruptions)… Sir, I would like to thank all the 
Members of this House for giving a lot of en thusiasm and a lot of attention to the Civil 
Aviation. …(Interruptions)… I am coming to the question.  This is the first time that I 
am answering a question in Rajya Sabha.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes,  please.  
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
63

The House re-assemble
d after lunch at two of the clock. 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI:  Sir ... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   No one should speak unless I give time.  Please take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)... I will give time.  Take your seat . Now, Papers to be laid on the 
Table - Shri Pankaj Chaudhary.  
The Economic Survey, 2023-24 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) :  महोदय, मȅ सांिख्यकीय पिरिशÍट सिहत आिर्थक 
समीक्षा, 2023-24 की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Pramod Tiwari. 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ आपका बहुत आभारी हूं।  यह आपकी ही क ृपा से संभव हो पाया।  * 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
* Not recorded.
64
[RAJYA SABHA]
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: So, I wanted to make some comments on 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Regarding the Hosur Airport, whenever a Greenfield 
airport has to be constructed, the proposal actually comes f rom the State 
itself. That is why we have categorically mentioned in the answer also  that no 
proposal as such has been received by the State Government and we stand by it.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hind i) are 
available as Part-I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 

 
 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Nothing will go on record.  This  will not go on record.  This is 
inappropriate. ...(Interruptions)... Ģमोद जी, बैिठए।  This is inappropriate.  
...(Interruptions)... This will not go on record.  This is surely not expected of senior 
Members. ...(Interruptions)... There was an assurance to me in my Chamber that 
Shri Jairam Ramesh would never speak whil e sitting and he would speak after getting 
permission. The Leader of the House was present and, right now, he has not taken 
even five minutes to violate it. You violated  it.  Jairam Rameshji, I warn you.  You 
spoke while sitting.  ...(Interruptions)... The Leader of the House.  
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA) :  For my colleague, 
I would say in a lighter vein that old habits die hard.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  सर, यह नƿा साहब पर पूरा का पूरा लागू होगा ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, we will take up the Sp ecial Mentions.  Hon. Members, we 
are accommodating today all the Special Mentions received.  Shri Kartikeya Sharma.  
  
Need for an Indigenized English proficiency test 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA (Haryana) : Sir, the IELTS (International English 
Language Testing System) and the TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language) 
exams, amongst others, are pivotal for Indian aspirants seeking education and 
opportunities abroad.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
These exams serve as a standardized measur e of English proficiency, required by 
universities and immigration departments in English-speaking countries.  The industry 
surrounding these exams has grown significan tly post Covid-19, making it an multi-
billion dollar industry with ever increasing vo lumes of aspirants registering for these 
exams.   
 One significant issue is the high cost associated with taking these exams.  
Every year, lakhs of Indian aspirants appear for these ex ams, the fees for which is 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
65

 
 
 
usually upwards of INR 10,000 per exam.  This also indicates that an hefty annual 
revenue of several billion dollars is being generated for foreign entities conducting 
these exams.  This cost is exacerbated by  additional expenses , such as coaching 
fees, study materials, repeated attempts, and lack of adequate exam centres 
entailing to high travel costs as well. 
 Considering the said facts, it would on ly be appropriate that India comes up 
with an indigenous English proficiency test, catering to the needs and aspirations of 
Indians.  I request Ministry of Education to take initiative of formulating a world-class 
test based on internationally-accepted st andards and make joint efforts with the 
Ministry of External Affairs to create its acceptance throughout the countries with 
global education hubs. This shall not only afford ease of access for an economically 
challenged aspirant but also democratize the mechanism of learning English as a 
means of gaining higher education from foreign lands.    
                                                                                   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Kartikeya Sharma: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala) and Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala).                            
 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla, not present; Shri Sant Balbir Singh, not present; 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, not present; Dr. John Brittas.  Demand for setting up 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences in Kozhikode District of Kerala.  
 
Demand for setting up AIIMS in Kozhikode, Kerala  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, in an effort to address regional disparities in the 
accessibility and affordability of advanced tertiary healthcare services across the 
nation, the Government has been establis hing new All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS) in various States under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha 
Yojana (PMSSY) initiative. A total of 22 AIIMS have been announced so far under this 
scheme in various States, except Kerala.  Ke rala is perhaps the only major State in 
the country that does not have an AIIMS.  The demand to set up an AIIMS in Kerala 
dates back over a decade. Th ough the State of Kerala ha s remarkable feats in the 
healthcare sector, the absence of a Union Government-funded Institution of National 
Importance for tertiary healthcare and re search remains a significant gap. 
Recognizing this, Government of Kerala has already identified and proposed Kinalur in 
Kozhikode District as a suitable location, equipped with all necessary facilities to cater 
to the requirements for the establishment of AIIMS.  However, despite repeated 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
appeals from the State, a definitive deci sion from the Union Government is still 
awaited. In an answer to a written question  raised by me in Ra jya Sabha on July 25, 
2023, Government revealed that the prop osal for AIIMS in Kerala has not been 
approved in the current phase of PMSSY. 
 Therefore, I earnestly and fervently ur ge upon the Government to review its 
stance and expeditiously grant approval for the establishment of AIIMS at Kinalur in 
Kozhikode district in Kerala.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by hon. Memb er, Dr. John Brittas: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sandosh Ku mar P (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri M. Mohamed Abdu lla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala).   
 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar, not present.   Shri Haris Beeran. Concern over 
Exponential Increase in Airfares being charged by the Airline Companies. 
 
Concern over exponential increase in air fares being charged by the airline 
companies 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala): Sir, I am raising the matte r regarding the exponential 
increase in airfares being charged by the airline companies with particular reference to 
the Gulf region.  Rule 134 of the Aircra ft Rules states that there cannot be any 
monopoly or cartelization with regard to the airfares. The DGCA is the appropriate 
authority in this regard. The majority of ex pats in the Gulf area are engaged in blue-
collar jobs. They face excessive  airfares, particularly on Air India Express. It is also 
pertinent to note that there are numerous complaints against Air India Express 
regarding irregular price hikes, inconsistent flight schedules and abrupt cancellations. 
On 9th May, 2024, 85 Air India Express flig hts (out of 380) were cancelled across the 
c o u n t r y ,  a n d ,  o n  1 2 t h  M a y ,  5 2  f l i g h t s  w ere cancelled. More than 400 flights were 
cancelled and re-scheduled within two weeks in May alone.  Further, the user fee at 
Thiruvananthapuram Airport has been hike d by 50 per cent by the Airport Economic 
Regulatory Authority, which significantly impacts air travel and tourism sector in 
Kerala. In this background, I request the hon.  Minister for the Civil Aviation to direct 
the DGCA to perform its statutory duties, cap the airfares and penalize those airline 
companies which are in breach of the Aircraft Rules.  
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
67

 
 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by hon. Member , Shri Haris Beeran: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).      
N o w ,  S h r i  P r a m o d  T i w a r i .   D e m a n d  to Approve Unchahar-Amethi Rail Line 
Project. 
 
Demand to approve Unchahar-Amethi rail line project 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान) : महोदय, ऊ ंचाहार-अमेठी रेल लाइन पिरयोजना, िजसका 
िशलान्यास 26 नवंबर, 2013 को िकया गया था, अभी भी रेलवे की मंजूरी का इंतजार कर रही है। 
यह उǄर Ģदेश क े तीन महत्वपूणर् िजलȗ अमेठी, Ģतापगढ़ और रायबरेली को जोड़ने वाली एक 
महत्वपूणर् पिरयोजना है।  इस पिरयोजना मȂ सात रेलवे Îटेशनȗ क े िनमार्ण की पिरकÊपना की गई 
है।  रेल मागर् की ल
ंबाई 66.17 िकमी अनुमािनत है। यह अपने मागर् पर 81 गांवȗ को जोड़ेगा। 
 Ģोजेक्ट की डीपीआर भी तैयार हो चुकी है, लेिकन दुख की बात है िक एक दशक से 
अिधक समय बीत जाने क े बावजूद यह पिरयोजना अधर मȂ लटकी ह
ुई है। 
 यह पिरयोजना रायबरेली, सलोन, Ģतापगढ़ और अमेठी क े िनवािसयȗ क े  िलए जीवन 
रेखा है।  उƪ क्षेतर् क े िनवासी िरÌतȗ क े माध्यम से एक-दूसरे से गहराई से जुड़े हुए हȅ।  इसके  
अलावा ऊ ंचाहार और अमेठी क े बीच संचार का कोई सीधा साधन नहीं है।  अठेहा, सलोन और 
अमेठी क े बीच कोई टैक्सी सेवा भी नहीं है। अतः यह पिरयोजना क्ष
ेतर्वािसयȗ को अत्यिधक लाभ 
पहुँचायेगी। 
 इसिलए, मȅ रेल मंतर्ी से इस पिरयोजना को जÊद से जÊद मंजूरी देने का आगर्ह करता हूँ, 
क्यȗिक यह आम जनता क े िहत मȂ है। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri Pramod Tiwari:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala);
 Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala); Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha); Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala); Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu); Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan).  
 Now, Shri P. Wilson; not present.  Dr . V. Sivadasan.  Concern over Rail 
Infrastructure and Services in Kannur. 
 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Concern over rail infrastructure and services in Kannur 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) :  Sir, rail infrastructure an d services in Kannur require 
immediate attention from the Government. Due to insufficient number of tracks, trains 
are halted at various stations for hours.  The number of train services from Kannur 
Station to the south and north is insufficient . The situation is such  that after 9 p.m., 
there are no passenger trains to travel to south till early morning. The passengers who 
need to reach the State capital are left with  few options and this situation needs to be 
changed immediately. The infrastructure at  the Kannur Railway station is also in a 
pathetic condition as the number of platform s is insufficient and due to the lack of 
functioning lifts, even the differently-abled are forced to walk up and down the stairs. 
There are no toilets in platforms which cau se hardship for the passengers especially 
women, elderly and the differently-abled.  The number of general coaches in long 
distance trains has been cut down.  This has badly affected the ordinary commuters. 
Urgent steps should be taken to increase the number of general coaches in all trains. I 
urge the Government to take immediate step s for improving the rail infrastructure and 
services in Kannur.  Thank you, Sir.            
                                                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Dr. V. Sivadasan:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala); Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha); Sh ri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala); Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri A.A. Rahim (K erala).                       
(Ends) 
 Now, Shri Chunnilal Garasiya; not pr esent.  Shri Sandosh Kumar P, on 
Demand to Change the Name of Kerala to Keralam. 
 
Demand to change the name of Kerala to Keralam 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) :  Sir, the demand to change the name of the 
State of 'Kerala' to 'Keralam' is a long-pending request from the people of the State. 
Since the State's name should reflect the history, culture and heritage of the people 
living in the State, the demand to change  the existing name to an Indigenously-
originated name is genuinely acceptable. Recently, the Kerala Legislative Assembly 
has unanimously passed a resolution asking  the Central Government to change the 
State's name to 'Keralam officially'. 'Ker alam' implies the land of Kera - coconut- 
tree. It was the 'Aikya Keralam' movement  in the 1920s which called for a separate 
State based on linguistic grounds for those who speak Malayalam. In 1956, a State for 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
69

 
 
 
Malayalam speakers was eventually form ed.  But the First Schedule to the 
Constitution used the name Kerala instead  of Keralam. Last year also, the State 
Government had submitted the same demand  to the Central Government. However, 
the Union Home Ministry reviewed the Kerala Government's resolution and 
recommended some technical modifications. Since independence, many states, 
cities and districts have changed their name s in tune with the rising demands of the 
people. Uttaranchal became Uttarakhand in  2007; Orissa was renamed Odisha in 
2011. Bombay was renamed Mumbai; and Madras became Chennai. Hence, the 
Central Government can take steps to change  the name of Kerala to Keralam as well. 
I strongly demand that the Government shou ld take proactive steps to alter the name 
of the state to Keralam at the earliest.                                                                      
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Me mber, Shri Sandosh Kumar P:  Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri Jose K. Mani (Ker ala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Concern over delay in completion of National Highway projects and its poor 
maintenance in Odisha 
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN (Odisha) :  The situation of National Highways (NHs) in 
Odisha is currently dire, characterized by significant delays in NH projects and their 
poor maintenance. One prominent exampl e is the Cuttack-Sambalpur National 
Highway project, which has become a source of immense frustration and 
inconvenience for the people of Odisha.   
 Many NH projects in Odisha are expe riencing massive delays, leading to 
prolonged construction periods and disrup ted traffic flow. This not only impacts 
commuters but also affects businesses an d local economies dependent on smooth 
transport routes. 
 The maintenance of existing NHs in Od isha is substandard, with potholes, 
uneven surfaces, and inadequate signag e posing serious safety hazards for 
motorists. This lack of upkeep contributes to increased accidents and travel 
discomfort.  The Cuttack-Sambalpur NH pr oject exemplifies these issues, where 
incomplete construction, frequent roadbl ocks, and unclear timelines have caused 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
significant hardships for residents and travel ers alike. The prolonged nature of this 
project has disrupted daily routines, hampered logistics, and increased travel costs.  
 I urge the Government to ensure proper  maintenance of National Highways in 
Odisha. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Me mber, Shri Muzibulla Khan:  Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odi sha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).  
 
Need to expedite track-doubling project in the Villupuram-Thanjavur mainline section 
of Southern Railway 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, the people of Thanjavur delta are 
demanding for the track-doubling project in the Villupuram-Thanjavur mainline section 
via Mayiladuthurai and Kumbakonam. This line will be passing through popular tourist 
and religious destinations like Chidambaram,  Vaitheeswaran Koil, Mayiladuthurai and 
Kumbakonam. The main line is an old line  and is already saturated though the 
passenger traffic and goods traffic has increased. The project is pending for a long 
time. 
 The survey for the whole project is already completed and I assure the 
Railways that this line being a busy line  and giving good occupancy in passenger 
traffic, they will get good return. 
 I would therefore urge upon the hon. Mi nister of Railways and the hon. Minister 
of Finance to make adequate budgetary allocations for this doubling project work so 
that the work can be started at the earliest and the project would be operational in the 
near future.       
                                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri M. Shanmugam: Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri 
A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri R. Giriraja n (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala)  and Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
(Tamil Nadu).  
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
71

 
 
 
Extension of defence corridor of Chitrakoot-Jhansi, Kanpur and Lucknow up to 
Etawah and Auraiya districts 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश) :  उपसभापित महोदय, आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ǎारा रक्षा उत्पादन को Ģोत्सािहत करने हेतु देश मȂ िविभन्न Îथानȗ का 
चयन कर वहां िडफȂ स कॉिरडोर को Îथािपत करने की योजना बनाई गई है।  इसी कर्म मȂ उǄर 
Ģदेश क े आगरा, अलीगढ़, लखनऊ, कानपुर, िचतर्कू ट तथा झांसी मȂ िडफȂ स कॉिरडोर ĢÎतािवत 
है।  महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश
 क े औरैया तथा इटावा जनपद भौगोिलक दृिÍट से औǏोिगक िवकास क े 
अनुरूप  पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ िÎथत हȅ।  दोनȗ ही जनपद उǄर Ģदेश की उच्चतम िशक्षा दर वाले 
जनपदȗ मȂ से एक हȅ, परंतु दोनȗ जनपदȗ मȂ औǏोिगक िवकास की कमी क े कारण युवाओं को 
रोजगार क े िलए बड़े शहरȗ मȂ जाना पड़ता है। महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से िनवेदन 
करती हूँ िक िडफȂ स कॉिरडोर क े िलए चयिनत िचतर्कू ट- झांसी, कानपुर तथा लखनऊ कॉिरडोर 
का िवÎतार इटावा तथा औरैया जनपद तक िकया जाए।  दोनȗ ही जनपद झांसी तथा िचतर्कू ट से 
बुंदेलखंड एक्सĢेसवे क े माध्यम से, कानपुर से सड़क व रेल मागर् ǎारा तथा लखनऊ से आगरा-
लखनऊ एक्सĢेसवे से सीधे जुड़े हुए हȅ।  िडफȂ स कॉिरडोर क े दोनȗ जनपदȗ तक िवÎतार से क्षेतर् मȂ 
िवकास की नई संभावनाओं क े साथ ही युवाओं को रोजगार क े नए अवसर ĢाÃत हो सकȂ गे।  
धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha: 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Moha med Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha). 
 
Demand of measures for the welfare of duck farmers 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): Sir, I would like to draw the kind 
attention of the House to the distress faced  by duck-rearing farmers in Kerala, who 
are continually losing their livelihoods due to  the intermittent ou tbreaks of bird flu 
(avian influenza). The bird flu scare has re surfaced in Kerala, particularly in the 
Alappuzha district. Thousands of birds, pr edominantly ducks, have either died or 
been culled in recent years. Besides ducks, the infection can also affect hens, quail, 
geese, and other ornamental birds. The virus outbreaks have become an annual 
issue. Early confirmation of these outbreaks is crucial to limit culling to smaller areas 
and prevent massive economic losses for farm ers. Farmers need proper scientific 
advice to manage such situations effectively.  Regular monitoring of wild aquatic birds 
and bird-poultry-wetland interface is esse ntial to understanding the prevalence of 
avian influenza viruses. A year-round su rveillance mechanism for migratory birds is 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
also vital to understanding their role in spreading the virus. Simply banning duck-
rearing for a period is not a sufficient measure to contain bird flu. Local communities 
are bearing the brunt of these outbreaks,  facing substantial economic losses that 
undermine their livelihoods.  
 I urge the Government to take immediate action to establish a National Institute 
of High-Security Animal Diseases (NIHSAD) in Alappuzha, similar to the one in 
Bhopal, to enable early detection and confirma tion of the virus. Additionally, a special 
financial aid package should be grante d to support farmers who have incurred 
significant losses. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham:  Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri  A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Neeraj Dangi 
(Rajasthan).  
 
Demand for Banking Licence for the District Central Cooperative Bank in Namakkal 
District, Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I rise to bring to your attention the 
urgent need for a banking license for th e District Central Cooperative Bank in 
Namakkal District, Tamil Nadu. In 1996 Nama kkal District was bifurcated from Salem 
District. The Namakkal District has emer ged as an economic hub with a strong 
presence in dairy and poultry farming. The ma jority of the district's population is 
engaged in agricultural activities. Various Cooperative Societies, including Agriculture 
Credit, Dairying, and Handloom Weavers Societies operate within the region. 
Considering the district's economic impo rtance and substantial deposits, around 
Rs.1,000 crore, contributed by societies an d the public of Namakkal District to the 
Salem District Central Cooperative Bank, the Government of Tamil Nadu formed a 
committee to conduct a possible study for the establishment of a new District Central 
Cooperative Bank in Namakkal District. The committee recommended establishing 
the Namakkal District Central Cooperative Ba nk. Acting on this recommendation, the 
bank was duly established and registered under the Tamil Nadu Cooperative Society 
Act, 1983. The bank commenced operations on 13th March, 2024. In this regard, an 
application for a banking license has been submitted through NABARD to the RBI for 
the District Central Cooperative Bank in Namakkal District. I request the Ministry of 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
73

 
 
 
Finance to look into the matter for granting  a banking license to the District Central 
Cooperative Bank of Namakkal District in Tamil Nadu.        
                                                                  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar:  Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN So mu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. 
V. Sivadasan (Kerala). 
 
Demand to approve the Thanjavur –Pudukkottai – Madurai railway line 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu) :  S i r ,  s i n c e  1 925, the Thanjavur–
Pudukkottai–Madurai railway-line has been a long-cherished project for people from 
all walks of life. This dream project is almost one century old.  The plan for this 
railway-line was made during the British period, and land markings were established. 
The stones used for land markings are st ill available. Thanjavur is also known as 
Southern Capital of Hindu Religion. It is  home to the UNESCO site called the 1000-
year-old Granite Big Temple, and has many other important heritage sites and tourist 
attractions, surrounded by key Navagrah a temples. Pudukkottai is one of the 
important central districts in Tamil Nadu, with significant commercial connections to 
Thanjavur and Madurai. It has commercial an d trading links with many wholesalers all 
over India. But sadly, the Thanjavur– Pudukkottai–Madurai Railway line is a 100-
year-old dream railway line for Tamil Nadu pe ople still in papers. It will benefit more 
than 5 districts in Tamil Nadu, including Thanjavur, Sivagangai, Pudukkottai, Trichy, 
and Tiruvarur. Also, it will provide direct and the shortest rail connectivity from North 
to Southern areas. However, it is yet to be placed in the Pink-Book. This line will 
benefit both passengers and freight moveme nts, particularly from Tuticorin and 
Rameswaram to other areas, as the existing lines are main ly used for passenger train 
movements. Also, this project will have a high rate of return.  Hence, I humbly request 
the hon. Minister of Railways to immediately look into this issue with utmost priority 
and take necessary steps to approve the same.      
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla:  Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Gi rirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A. A. 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala).                   
संत बलबीर िंसह जी, आपका Îपेशल मȂशन है - Demand to stop the cultivation of 
paddy in Punjab.   
 
Demand to stop cultivation of paddy in Punjab 
 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH (Punjab) :  
@Sir, Punjab which fed the people of the 
country during the Green Revolution period and filled the country's granary is currently 
paying a heavy price. The excessive use of  chemical fertilizers and pesticides in 
Punjab has turned the prosperous state in to a cancer zone.  Farmers of Punjab are 
stuck in crop cycle of wheat and paddy . The Government adopted the Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) policy to meet the Ce ntral grain storage requirements on the 
farmers of Punjab since 1973. Now every y ear the area under paddy is increasing in 
Punjab. Due to this, the pres sure on the underground wa ter is also increasing.  
During paddy cultivation, where the vast wa ter storage is being affected, handling of 
the paddy stubble afterwards also remains a major challenge every year. Every year, 
precious lives are lost due to accidents due to this smoke.  Therefore, the paddy crop 
is not suitable according to the climatic conditions of Punjab.  Pond-irrigation is 
required for the paddy crop, which has le d to dangerous groundwater depletion in 
more than three-fourth blocks in Punjab . Now in Punjab, there is no life without 
submersible motors for irrigation of crop s. These tools have become the cause of 
debt for the farmers. I urge the Government to take suitable measures to stop the 
cultivation of paddy in Punjab.     
                                            
Ǜी उपसभापित : संत बलबीर िंसह जी, आपने अंगर्ेज़ी मȂ िदया था, लेिकन पंजाबी मȂ पढ़ा। 
माननीय सदÎय, जो अपर्ूËड टेक्Îट होता है,  आप  वही पढ़ सकते हȅ। क ृपया इस बात का ध्यान 
रखȂ। माननीय डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  Please.  
 
Demand for establishing a single window clearance system for doctors looking to start 
hospital 
 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE (Maharashtra):  Sir, it has been reported that 
all health insurance claims will now be pr ocessed through a single
 window called the 
                                         
@ English translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
75

 
 
 
National Health Claims Exchange (NHCX), which will be utilized by hospitals and 
insurance companies. The National Sing le Window System (NSWS) is a digital 
platform designed to assist in identifying and applying for approvals based on specific 
business requirements (https://www.nsws. gov.in/). Many State Governments are 
currently offering a Single Window Clearance  System, which grants clearances within 
a specified timeframe to attract investment s. Additionally, the Central Drugs Control 
Organization has recently implemented a Single Window Clearance System, which is 
a positive development. I strongly urge th e Central Government, in collaboration with 
State Governments, to explore the possibility of establishing a uniform Single Window 
Clearance System for doctors looking to start hospitals. Thank you very much.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by hon. Memb er, Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade: Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar 
Pradesh) and Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra).                                                                     
 
Demand to increase the number of general class coaches in trains 
 
Ǜी भीम िंसह ( िबहार) : महोदय , अपने देश क े दैिनक जीवन मȂ रेलवे एक महत्वपूणर् भूिमका 
िनभाती है।  हर िदन लाखȗ लोग रेलȗ का सहारा लेकर अपने गन्तËय तक पहुंचते हȅ।  रेलवे ने सभी 
टर्ेनȗ मȂ फÎटर् एसी क्लास, AC-2 Tier, AC-3 Tier कोचȗ की संख्या बढ़ाई है, लेिकन साधारण 
Ǜेणी क े िडÅबȗ मȂ बढ़ोतरी लगभग नगण्य ह
ै।  ऐसे मȂ इन कोचȗ मȂ यातर्ा करना बेहद कÍटकारी  हो 
जाता है।  िवशेषकर िबहार, उǄर Ģदेश और झारखंड क े Ģवासी मजदूरȗ को इससे बहुत िदक्कतȂ 
होती हȅ।  ये मजदूर खासकर पवर्, त्यौहारȗ क े अवसर पर िडÅबȗ मȂ ठ ुंसकर यातर्ा करने को बाध्य हो 
जाते हȅ।  अत: इस स
ंदभर् मȂ मȅ सरकार का ध्यानाकषर्ण करते हुए रेलȗ मȂ साधारण Ǜेणी क े िडÅबȗ 
की संख्या बढ़ाने हेतु मांग करता हूं, तािक समाज का गरीब नागिरक भी सुगम
 रेल यातर्ा का 
बेहतर लाभ उठा सके ।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Dr. Bhim Singh: Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao 
Bonde (Maharashtra), Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patr
a 
(Odisha) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala). 
 
Withdrawal of 18 percent GST on Kendu leaf for the welfare of tribal 
 communities in Odisha 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha) : Mr. Deputy Chairman,  Sir, Kendu leaf is financial 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
backbone of about 10 lakhs Kendu leaf Pl uckers, binders and seasonal workers of 
Odisha, mostly tribal mothers and sisters. Th e tribal people collect the leaves as part 
of their right defined under Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. They have the right to procure and sell 
these products. Imposition of GST (18 per cent) on Kendu leaves is adversely 
affecting the Kendu leaves trade. This, in turn, affects the livelihoods of Kendu leaves 
Pluckers, binders and seasonal workers and implementation of social security and 
welfare measures for them. In the interest  of the livelihoods of the Kendu leaves 
dependent community, it is urged upon Government of India to withdraw the 
imposition of GST on Kendu leaves for the greater interest of the tribals in Odisha. 
Former Chief Minister of Odisha wrote to Government of India on 25th November, 2022 
requesting for withdrawal of GST on Kendu leaves. In the 48 th GST Council meeting 
held on 17th December, 2022 Odisha's then  Finance Minister had also raised the 
demand for exemption of Goods and Services Tax (GST) on Kendu leaf. The Biju 
Janata Dal has been relentlessly seeking the withdrawal of GST from Kendu leaf. The 
withdrawal of GST on Kendu leaf will stre ngthen and empower ab out 10 lakh tribal 
mothers and sisters. Complete withdrawal  of the imposition of GST on Kendu 
(Tendu) leaf is important. I urge the Go vernment of India to take up the matter 
proactively.           
                                                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra : Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).           
                                                                               
Concern over recent hike in Mobile tariff plans 
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala) : Sir, the recent hike in mobile tariff plans by various 
service providers has caused significant financ ial strain on citizens, particularly those 
from economically weaker sections.  Mobile  service providers ha ve recently revised 
their tariff plans, leading to an increase of 15 to 25 per cent in mobile phone bills. In 
the current era, mobile communication is not a luxury but a necessity . It is a critical 
tool for education, employment, healthcare, and overall social connectivity. The steep 
increase in tariffs has placed an undue burden on households already grappling with 
the economic pressure of the pandemic and inflation.  Many students, workers and 
small business owners rely heavily on af fordable mobile services for their daily 
operations. The increased tariffs have disrup ted their activities, affecting productivity 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
77

 
 
 
and access to essential services. It will also increase the digital divide in the country. It 
is very important to consider the measur es to alleviate the financial strain on 
consumers.   
 I request the Government to take possible steps to review the tariff hikes and 
explore subsidies for low income users. Also, introduce regulatory measures to 
ensure that any future tariff changes ar e gradual and considerate of the public's 
capacity to absorb such costs. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri A. A. Rahim:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri  Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).                                                                                   
 
Demand for legislation on Population control in India 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): उपसभापित महोदय ,Ģधान मंतर्ी नरȂदर् मोदी जी ने बढ़ती जनसंख्या 
को लेकर लाल िकले से 2019 मȂ Îवतंतर्ता िदवस क े मौके  पर देश क े लोगȗ से छोटे पिरवार की 
अपील की। जनसंख्या िवÎफोट लोकतंतर् और सामािजक , आिर्थक िवकास क े िलए सबसे बड़ा 
खतरा है और यह ज्यादातर समÎयाओं की जड़ है। नागिरकȗ को Îवच्छ हवा, Îवच्छ पेयजल, 
ÎवाÎथ्य और आǛय, जीवनयापन, िशक्षा का अिधकार है और जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण क े बगैर इनको 
सुिनिÌचत नहीं िकया जा सकता। अभी 125 करोड़ भारतीयȗ क े आधार काडर् ह
ȅ जबिक करीब 20 
फीसदी यानी 25 करोड़  लोग िबना आधार काडर् क े हȅ। इसके  अलावा बड़ी संख्या मȂ बांग्लादेशी, 
रोिंहग्या घुसपैिठये अवैध रूप  से रह रहे हȅ। हमारे पास अमेिरका की तुलना मȂ एक ितहाई भूिम है ,
जबिक जनसंख्या की दर अमेिरका की तुलना मȂ आठ गुना है।  जनसंख्या िवÎफोट अिधक उपभोग 
क े कारण जनसांिख्यकीय आपदा और Ģाकृ ितक संसाधनȗ क े पूरी तरह से खत्म हो जाने क े गहरे 
भय क े आवेग मȂ बदल चुका है।  
 महोदय , जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण क े Ģयास सफलतापूवर्क हȗ, ल
ेिकन यह भी ध्यान रखना 
होगा िक कहीं भी जनसांिख्यकीय असंतुलन की िÎथित पैदा न होने पाए। ऐसा न हो िक िकसी एक 
वगर् की आबादी बढ़ने की गित अिधक हो और द
ूसरे वगर् की जनसंख्या िÎथरीकरण क े Ģयासȗ से 
उनकी आबादी को िनयंितर्त कर जनसंख्या असंतुलन पैदा हो। िजन देशȗ मȂ असंतुलन होता है ,
वहां िंचताएं बढ़ती हȅ, धािर्मक डेमोगर्ाफी पर िवप
रीत असर पड़ता है और वहां पर अËयवÎथा, 
अराजकता जन्म लेने लगती है।  मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करता हूं िक वह दुिनया क े िवकिसत देशȗ क े 
जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण कानून और नीितयȗ का अध्ययन करके  भारत मȂ जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण क े उपाय 
सुझाए और कानून बनाए। 
 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), associated 
himself with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Naresh Bansal.                                
 
Demand to introduce Tejas coaches in Howrah and Sealdah Rajdhani Express trains 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal) :  Sir, Howrah-New Delhi Rajdhani 
Express is the oldest Rajdhani  Express in the country. It started its journey long back 
in 1969.  Later on, owing to the high demands of the passengers plying between Delhi 
and Kolkata and to ease down the existing  pressure of bookings on the Howrah 
Rajdhani Express, Indian Railways introduc ed the Sealdah Rajdhani Express in the 
year 2000. Both these trains are presently plying with modern LHB coaches.  While 
initially both these trains could be distingu ished by their LHB coaches as other trains 
were having ICF coaches, the difference between the ordinary express trains and 
these Rajdhanis have dwindled in recent years owing to modernization efforts 
undertaken by the Indian Railways by way of replacing old ICF coaches of ordinary 
express trains with LHB ones . Indian Railways have of la te introduced more modern 
Tejas coaches in several Rajdhani Expre ss trains including Mumbai Central-New 
Delhi, Rajendra Nagar Terminal-New De lhi, Bhubaneswar-New Delhi, etc.   
Accordingly, I request the Ministry of Rail ways, Government of India to consider 
introduction of modern Tejas coaches in Howrah and Sealdah Rajdhani Express 
trains.  
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Now, Shri Sanjeev Arora; not present, Shri Shambhu 
Sharan Patel; not present.  Now, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray. 
 
Repatriation of smuggled stolen Indian antiquities from foreign countries 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (WEST BENGAL) :  As per reports published in 
indianculture.gov.in and various news reports published in national dailies till recently, 
it appears that many Indian antiquities stolen from differen t temples and museums 
across the country were smuggled out from time  to time found to be stored in various 
museums and private galleries/auction cente rs in foreign countries. However, some 
of those antiquities started being repatriate d to India since past few decades due to 
bilateral investigations and diplomatic in itiatives taken by India and the concerned 
countries. The Metropolitan Museum of Ne w York alone returned hundreds of such 
stolen Indian antiquities in 2015-2016. Again in July, 2023, US Metropolitan Museum 
returned 105 trafficked Indian artefacts. Out of the latest repatriated antiquities, a few 
[ 22 July, 2024 ]
79

 
 
 
date back to 1st century BC to 16th CE an d originated from UP, West Bengal, Bihar, 
South India and other parts of the country. It  is not known as to where the repatriated 
hundreds of antiquities are presently stored in India. I would request the Government 
to inform about the exact number of antiquities recovered from foreign countries, their 
places of origin and present places of storage. I would also urge upon the 
Government to return the recovered antiqu ities originated from Chandraketugarh and 
other archaeological sites of West Bengal  to the State Archaeological Museum or 
Indian Museum in Kolkata so that the peop le of Bengal can have a sight of those 
invaluable artefacts and feel the pride of the past glories and rich histories of the 
concerned places. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon.  Member, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray :  S h r i  
Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Ms. 
Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala) and 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
 Hon. Members, the House stands adjo urned to meet at one hour after the 
conclusion of the presentation of the Union Budget, 2024-25 in the Lok Sabha 
tomorrow, that is, 23
rd of July, 2024. 
 
The House then adjourned at forty-three minutes past two of the clock till Tuesday, 
the 23rd July, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 