Vol. 266          Tuesday, 
No. 6   03 December, 2024 
          12, Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 8 and pages 11 - 13) 
Reports of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs– Laid on the Table  (page 8) 
Statements of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Pub lic Distribution (2024-2025) –Laid on the 
Table  (pages 8 - 9) 
Statement by Minister– 
Motion  for  Election  to  the  Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda 
(ITRA), Jamnagar –Adopted  (pages 9 - 10) 
 Motion  for  Election  to  the  All  India  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences (AIIMS), 
 Jodhpur – Adopted  (page 10)
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
Status    of    implementation    of   Recommendations   contained   in   the    138th
 
    Report of  the  Department - related   Parliamentary   Standing  Committee  on  
     Health  and  Family  Welfare  on  ‘Medical  Devices :  Regulation  and   Control’  
– Laid on the Table (page 9)

Motion for Election to the All India Instit ute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Raipur–
Adopted
  (page 10) 
Observations by the Chair (page 13
Matters raised with Permission– 
Demand for immediate financial relief as sistance for the people affected by 
Cyclone Fengal in Tamil Nadu (pages 17 - 19) 
Demand t
o build an International Airport in Puri, Odisha (pages 19 - 20) 
Recent viol
ence and law and order situation in Sambhal, Uttar Pradesh (pages 20 
- 21)
Demand t
o declare recent landslide in Wa yanad district as calamity of severe 
nature under Level-3 disasters (pages 21 - 22) 
Need for promulgatio
n of Govern ment schemes meant for Women's 
empowerment (pages 22 - 24) 
Concern over misuse of Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (P M-JAY) scheme in 
Ahmedabad 
(pages 24 - 25) 
Concern over use of online gambling and be tting in providing financial support to 
terrorism (pages 25 - 26)
 
Concern over prevailing issue of air pollution in North India and its impact (pages 
26 - 27) 
Concern over decline in Medal Tally at Olympic Games (page 28) 
Concern over the functioning of Oil an d Natural Gas Corporati on (ONGC) in 
Assam (page 29) 
Demand t
o construct flyover (RoB) at Birpara and Kamakhyagudi in West Bengal 
(pages 29 - 30) 
Demand t
o enhance safety and security of Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 
Department of Atomic Energy, Kolkata (pages 30 - 32) 
Demand to adopt alternative means to address the problem of stubble burning 
(pages 32 -33) 
Need to 
increase the Minimum Support Price of sugar (pages 34 - 35) 
Request to use Artificial Intelligence for monitoring the endangered wildlife species 
(page 35) 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in
- 16)

Oral Answers to Questions (pages 36 - 74) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
Statement by Minister Correcting answer to Question –Laid on the Table (page 74 - 76) 
Government Bills—  
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024– 
Passed (pages 77 - 121) 
The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 – Under Consideration (pages 122 - 144) 
Special Mentions— 
Demand to fix rates of various treatments and procedures in private hospitals for 
general public on the lines of CGHS (pages 144 - 145) 
Demand for establishment of Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Authority (APEDA) Centre in Bihar (pages 145 - 146) 
Demand for Green Bonus and Special Package for Sikkim State (pages 146 - 
147) 
Concern over Mismatched Skill Development (page 147) 
Issue of Mismanagement during Man imahesh Yatra in Himachal 
Pradesh (pages 147 - 148) 
Demand for increase in the fellowships for OBC researchers (pages 148 - 149) 
Urgent need to address train sabotage and anti-national activities (page 149) 
Urgent Need t o Revoke t he Merger of RMS Offices with Speed Post 
Hubs (page 150) 
Demand to Restore Education to State List for a More Effective 
System (pages 150 -151) 
Demand for Viability Gap Funding (VGF)  by way of non-repayable grant for 
Vizhinjam International Seaport Thiruvananthapuram (pages 151 -152) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 3rd December, 2024 / 12 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be laid on the Table. 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
II. Report and Accounts (2022-23 and 2023-24) of HLL Lifecare Limited,
Thiruvananthapuram; AIIMS, Bibinagar, Telangana; NIN, Pune, Maharashtra;
LGBRIMH, Tezpur, Assam and related papers
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव):  महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of th e following Notifications of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, under Section 93 of the Food Safety and Standards Act,
2006, along with Extract of the Regulations: -
(1) No. REG-11027/2/2022-Regulation-FSSAI., dated the 18 th October, 2024,
publishing the Food Safety and Standa rds (Prohibition and Restrictions on
Sales) first Amendment Regulations, 2024.
(2) No. 01-SP (PAR)-Notification-Pesticides/Stds-FSSAI/2017., dated the 18 th
October, 2024, publishing the Food Sa fety and Standards (Contaminates,
toxins and Residues) First Amendment Regulations, 2024.
 [Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see No. L. T. 1115/18/24] 
II. (A) (i) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 20
13: -
(a) Fifty-seventh Annual Report and Accounts of the HLL Lifecare Limited,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, for th e year 2022-23, together with the
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India thereon
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers
mentioned at (1) above.
[Placed in Library. see No. L. T. 1616/18/24] 

(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(4) of the Section 18 and Section 19 of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act,
1956 (as amended in 2012): -
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All In dia Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), Bibinagar, Telangana, for the year 2023-24, together with the
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library.  see  No. L. T. 765/18/24] 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Naturopathy
(NIN), Pune, Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, toge ther with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 766/18/24]  
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi
Regional Institute of Mental Heal th (LGBRIMH), Tezpur, Assam, for 
the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers  mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1617/18/24] 
Report and Accounts (2023-24) of IREDA, New Delhi; SSS-NIBE, Kapurthala, Punjab 
and related papers 
नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मं
तर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ǜीपाद यसो नाईक): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1)
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(a) Thirty-seventh Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Renewable Energy
Development Agency Limited (IREDA),  New Delhi, for the year 2023-24,
together with the Auditor's Report on  the Accounts and the comments of the
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

I. Notifications of the Mi nistry of Health and Family Welfare
II. Report and Accounts (2022-23) of NDTBC, New Delhi; IIPS, Mumbai,
Maharashtra and related papers
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Performance Review by Government on the working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 739/18/24] 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
fvfgg
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sardar Swaran Singh National Institute of
Bio-Energy (SSS-NIBE), Kapurthala, Punjab, for the year 2023-24, together
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Performance Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1007/18/24] 
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ा
लय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव):  महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
I. (i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Notification No. S.O. 4238(E)., dated the 26 th September, 2024, amending the
Schedule to the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions Act,
2021, under sub-section (2) of Section 70 of the said Act.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 767/18/24] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Notification No. G.S.R. 666(E)., dated the 28 th October, 2024, publishing a
Corrigendum to the Notification No. G.S.R. 922(E), dated the 28th December, 2023.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1121/18/24] 
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, under Section 38 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940:-
(1) G.S.R. 581(E)., dated the 19 th September, 2024, pub lishing the New Drugs
and Clinical Trials (Amendment) Rules, 2024.
(2) G.S.R. 922(E)., dated the 28 th December, 2023, publishing the Drugs
(……Amendment) Rules, 2023, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see No. L. T. 1121/18/24] 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
3

I. Notification of the Mini stry of Port s, Shipping and Waterways
II. Report and Accounts (2023-24)  of CSL, Kochi, Kerala;  UCSL, (f ormerlyTebma
Shipyard Limited), Kanc heepuram, Tamil Nadu; HC SL, Howrah, West Bengal
and related papers
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre
(NDTBC), New Delhi, for the ye ar 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1119/18/24] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e International Institute for
Population Sciences (IIPS), Mumb ai, Maharashtra, for the year 
2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1120/18/24] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
उपभोƪा
 मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी बी.एल. वमार्): 
महोदय, मȅ उपभोƪा संरक्षण अिधिनयम, 2019 की धारा 105 की उप-धारा (1) क े  अधीन 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय ( उपभोƪा मामले िवभाग) की 
िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(1) G.S.R. 474(E)., dated the 2 nd August, 2024, publishing the Consumer
Protection (Salary, allowances and co nditions of service of President and
Members of the State Commission an d District Commission) (Amendment)
Model Rules, 2024.
(2) G.S.R. 588(E)., dated the 25 th September, 2024, publishing the National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissi on (Group 'A' posts) Recruitment
(Amendment) Rules, 2024.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), See No. L. T. 1013/18/24] 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

III.  Report and Accounts (2023-24)  of NMPA, Mangal ore, Karnataka; V. O. 
Chidambaranar Port Authority, Tuticorin, Tamil Nadu; MPA, Goa; CPA, Kochi, 
Kerala; TAMP, Mumbai; IMU, Chennai and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND 
WATERWAYS ( SHRI SHANTANU THAKUR) : Sir, I lay on the Table: 
 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
Notification No. 11/2/2022/PAC.1., dated the 19
th September, 2024, publishing the 
New Mangalore Port Authority (Meetings of  Board, its Powers and Transaction of 
Business) Regulations, 2024, under Section 73 of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1131/18/24] 
 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL), 
Kochi, Kerala, for the year 2023-24, t ogether with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts and the comments of The Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1122/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Udupi Cochin Shipyard Limited 
(UCSL), (formerly Tebma Shipyard Limited), Kancheepuram, Tamil 
Nadu, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts and the comments of the Co mptroller and Auditor General of 
India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1124/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Limited 
(HCSL), Howrah, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of The 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1123/18/24] 
 
III.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (4) 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
5

of Section 44 of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021: - 
(i) (a) Administration Report of the New Mangalore Port Authority (NMPA),
Mangalore, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24.          
(b) Annual Accounts of the New Mangalor e Port Authority, Mangalore,
Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on the Admi nistration Report of the above Port
Authority.
(d) Review by Government on the Annual Accounts of the above Port
Authority.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1126/18/24] 
(ii)
(a) Forty-fifth Administration Report and Accounts of the V. O.
Chidambaranar Port Authority, Tuti corin, Tamil Nadu, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Port Authority.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1127/18/24] 
(iii) (a) Annual Administration Report of the Mo rmugao Port Authority, Goa, for
the year 2023-24. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Mormugao Port Authority (MPA), Goa, for the
year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c)
Review by Government on the Ad ministrative Report of the above Port
Authority.
(d) Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above   Port
Authority.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 769/18/24] 
(iv) (a) Annual Administration Report of the Cochin Port Authority (CPA),
Kochi, Kerala, for the year 2023-24. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Cochin Port Au thority, Kochi, Kerala, for the
year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on the Ad ministrative Reportof the above Port
Authority.
(d) Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above   Port
Authority.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 770/18/24] 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

I. Notification of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
II. Report and Accounts (2023-24) of  Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi
and related papers
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜीमती  िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखती हूं:- 
(v) (a) Annual Accounts of the Tariff Authority for Ma jor Ports (TAMP),
Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the y ear 2023-24, and the Audit Report 
thereon.    
(b) Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above Authority.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1129/18/24] 
(vi) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (3)
of Section 32 and sub-section (4) of Section 33 of the Indian Maritime University Act,
2008: -
(a) Annual Report of the Indian Maritime Un iversity (IMU), Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
for the year 2023-24.
(b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Maritime  University (IMU), Chennai, Tamil
Nadu, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1130/18/24] 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Harsh Malhotra; not present. Shrimati Nimuben Jayantibhai 
Bambhaniya. 
I.
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mini stry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Food and Pu blic Distribution) Notification No. S.O.
3959(E)., dated the 18 th September, 2024, amending the Principal Notification No.
S.O. 371(E), dated the 8 th February, 2017., issued unde r Section 7 of the Aadhaar
(Targeted Delivery of Financial And Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 756/18/24] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (11)
of Section 31 of the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962: -
(a) Sixty-seventh Annual
 Report and Accounts of the Central Warehousing
Corporation (CWC), New Delhi, for th e year 2023-24, together with   the
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
7

REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLI
AMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (WEST BENGAL):  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each 
(in English and Hindi) of the following Reports of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on External Affairs (Eighteenth Lok Sabha):- 
(i) First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of the
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs (17
th
Lok Sabha)  
on ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) - Contours of
Cooperation’;
(ii) Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations containe d in the Twenty Seventh Report  of
the Department related Parliamentary St anding Committee on External Affairs
(17th Lok Sabha) on ‘India’s Engagement with G20 Countries’; and
(iii) Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report of the
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs (17
th
Lok Sabha) on ‘Countering Global Terro
rism at Regional and International
Levels’.
STATEMENTS OF THE DEPAR
TMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  
DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025)  
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद (उǄर Ģदेश) :  महोदय, म ȅ िवभाग संबंिधत उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और 
सावर्जिनक िवतरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत की गई कारर्वाई संबंधी 
Ģितवेदनȗ (सतर्हवीं लोक सभा) क े अध्याय 1 और 5 मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ पर सरकार ǎारा की 
गई कारर्वाई को दशार्ने वाले अंितम की गई कारर्वाई संबंधी िववरण की एक-एक Ģित ( अंगर्
ेजी 
तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:-
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 757/18/24] 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(i) Thirty Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on ‘BIS-
Hallmarking & Jewellery’  pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs);
(ii) Thirty 
Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report on 
‘Pradhan Mantri 
Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)’ pertaining to the  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution);
(iii) Thirty 
Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report on ‘Coarse 
Grains Production and Distribution’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution); and
(iv) Thirty Sixth Repo
rt on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty Second Report on 
‘Sugar 
Industry in India- A Review’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
आयुष मंतर्ालय क े राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी  ( Ǜी 
Ģतापराव जाधव): महोदय, मȅ 'िचिकत्सा उपकरण: िविनयमन और िनयंतर्ण' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-
संबंिधत ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े 138वȂ Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट 
िसफािरशȗ क े कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ एक वƪËय सभा पटल पर रखता हूं।
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH 
IN AYURVEDA (ITRA), JAMNAGAR 
आयुष मंतर्ालय क े राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी  ( Ǜी 
Ģतापराव जाधव): सभापित महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत ĢÎताव उपिÎथत करता हूँ :  
"िक आयुवȃद िशक्षण और अनुसंधान संÎथान (आईटीआरए) अिधिनयम, 2020 की धारा 7 
की उप-धारा (4) क े साथ पिठत धारा 6 की उप-धारा (1) क े खंड (ट) क े अनुसरण मȂ, यह सभा 
उस रीित से, जैसा सभापित िनदेश दȂ, अिधिनयम क े उपबंधȗ क े अध्यधीन सभा क े सदÎयȗ मȂ से 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
9
STATEMENT BY MINISTER
Status of implementation of Recommendations contained in the 138th Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare on ‘Medical Devices: Regulation and Control

एक सदÎय को वतर्मान आकिÎमक िरिƪ क े Îथान पर आयुवȃद िशक्षण और अनुसंधान संÎथान, 
जामनगर का सदÎय होने क े िलए िनवार्िचत करने की कायर्वाही करे।" 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL 
SCIENCES (AIIMS), JODHPUR 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMI LY WELFARE; AND THE MINISTER OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA): Sir, I move:— 
“That in the pursuance of Section 4(g) re ad with Section 6 (1) of the All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, as amended by the All India Institutes of 
Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, this House do proceed to elect, in such a 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one member from amongst the Members of the 
House, to be a member of the All Indi a Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Jodhpur, subject to the provisions of the Act.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL 
SCIENCES (AIIMS), RAIPUR 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMI LY WELFARE; AND THE MINISTER OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA):  Sir, I move:- 
  
“That in the pursuance of Section 4(g) re ad with Section 6 (1) of the All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, as amended by the All India Institutes of 
Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, this House do proceed to elect, in such a 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one member from amongst the Members of the 
House, to be a member of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Raipur, 
subject to the provisions of the Act.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE–Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Papers to be laid on the Table. Shri Harsh Malhotra. 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
कारपोरेट कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा): सभापित महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् 
सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:-  
 
(i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, under Section 241 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016: - 
 (1) IBBI/2024-25/GN/REG114., dated 13 th August, 2024, publishing the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Information Utilities) 
(Amendment) Regulations, 2024. 
 
 (2) IBBI/2024-25/GN/REG115., dated 13
th August, 2024, publishing the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Inspection and Investigation) 
(Amendment) Regulations, 2024. 
 (3) IBBI/2024-25/GN/REG116., dated 24 th September, 2024, publishing the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for 
Corporate Persons) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (3), see No. L. T. 884/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, under sub-section (4) of Section 469 of the Companies Act, 
2013:- 
 (1) G.S.R. 552(E)., dated the 9 th September, 2024, publishing the Investor 
Education and Protection Fund Authorit y (Accounting, Audit, Transfer and 
Refund) Second Amendment Rules, 2024 
 (2) G.S.R. 607(E)., dated the 4 th October, 2024, publishing the Investor 
Education and Protection Fund Authority (Form of Annual Statement of 
Accounts) Amendment Rules, 2024.  
[Placed in Library.  For (1) and (2), see No. L. T. 885/18/24] 
 
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, under sub-section (3) of Section 63 of the Competition Act, 
2002:- 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
11

 (1) G.S.R. 544(E)., dated the 6 th September, 2024, publishing the Competition 
Commission of India (Salary, Allowances  and other Terms and Conditions of 
Service of Chairperson and other Members) Amendment Rules, 2024. 
 (2) G.S.R. 547(E)., dated the 9 th September, 2024, publishing the Competition 
(Minimum Value of Assets or Turnover) Rules, 2024. 
 (3) G.S.R. 548(E)., dated the 9 th September, 2024, publishing the Competition 
(Criteria of Combination) Rules, 2024. 
 (4) G.S.R. 549(E)., dated the 9 th September, 2024, publishing the Competition 
(Criteria for Exemption of Combinations) Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (4), see No. L. T. 887/18/24] 
 
(iv)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, under sub-section (3) of Section 64 of the Competition Act, 
2002: - 
 (1) F.No.CCI/CD/Comb. Regl./2024., dated the 9 th September, 2024, 
publishing the Competition Commission of India (Combinations) 
Regulations, 2024. 
 (2) CCI/ Reg-G.R./08/ 2024-25., dated the 17 th September, 2024, publishing 
the Competition Commission of India (General) Regulations, 2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) and (2), see No. L. T. 886/18/24] 
 
(v)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs Notification No.  
G.S.R. 506(E)., dated the 16 th August, 2024, amending the Principal Notification 
No. G.S.R. 835(E), dated the 4 th November, 2015, under Section 30B of the 
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, Section 40 of the Cost and Works Accountants 
Act, 1959 and Section 40 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 888/18/24] 
 
(vi)  
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of th e following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, under Section 40 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980: - 
 (1) S.O. 4111(E)., dated the 20 th September, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No. S.O. 1118(E), dated the 9th March, 2023. 
 (2) F. No. 104/44/Accts. -1(A)., dated the 24 th September, 2024, publishing 
the 44th Annual Report and the Audited Accounts of the Institute of Company 
Secretary of India for the financial year ended 31st March 2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) and (2), See No. L. T. 690/18/24] 
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (karnataka): Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, Jairam, you were saying something. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : सर, उनको टाइम पर आने क े िलए बोल दीिजए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have been in this House for long. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान ): सर, सदन की गिरमा है। 
(vii)  
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, under Section 30B of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949:- 
 (1) F. No. 1-CA(5)/ 75/2024., dated the 27 th September, 2024, publishing the 
75th Annual Report and the Audited Accounts of the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India for the financial year ended 31st March 2024. 
 (2) S.O. 4513(E)., dated the 15 th October, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No. S.O. 1591(E), dated the 12th April, 2019. 
 (3) No. 1-CA(5)/75A/2024., dated the 14 th November, 2024, publishing a 
Corrigendum to the Notification No. 1-CA(5)/75/2024., dated the 27 th 
September, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to(3),  See No. L. T. 888/18/24] 
 
(viii)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, under Section 40 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 
1959:- 
 (1) No. G/20-CWA/9/2024., dated the 27 th September, 2024, publishing the 
65th Annual Report and the Audited Accounts of the Institute of Cost 
Accountants of India for the financial year ended 31st March, 2024. 
 (2) G.S.R. 642(E)., dated the 15 th October, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 741(E), dated the 16th        October, 2023. 
 (3) G.S.R. 643(E)., dated the 15 th October, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 787(E), dated the 15th October, 2015. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (3), see No. L. T. 889/18/24] 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
13

 
Ǜी सभापित: िकतना अच्छा लग रहा है िक आप सदन की गिरमा की बात कर रहे हȅ।  मेरा मन 
Ģफु िÊलत हो गया है।  माननीय मंतर्ी जी, समय पर आइए।  And, the entire House, I am sure, 
must applaud. सदन की गिरमा देश की गिरमा है, हम सबकी गिरमा है। 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : चेयर की भी गिरमा है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, what a paradox!  We were talkin
g about the dignity 
of this House.   I have received 42 notices, the highest so far, in the last quarter of the 
century of adoption of the In dian Constitution, and the notices are under Rule 267.  
And, I had to seek counsel from Shri Jair am Ramesh, I called him to my Chamber.  
He is not the one who sent it, Shri Raghav Chadha has sent it .  It is in public domain 
and in 100 per cent disregard of the provisio ns.  It seems the gentleman has not read 
Rule 267 even once.  …(Interruptions)…  One minute.  And putting it in public domain 
is too serious a matter.  I would want this House to maintain highest ethical standards 
and protect our privileges.  It is under my contemplation.  I had discussed with 
leaders what steps are to be taken because this is getting beyond control at the 
moment.  Hon. Members, since the number is  42, with your leave, I would not be 
making reference to the names because th e number can grow to any level, at the 
level we have here.   But please take one th ing into consideration.  Under Rule 267, a 
Member wants that the House’s normal functioning be suspended to discuss a 
matter, and the same Member has given more than one notice under Rule 267.  That 
would be humanly impossible for anyone  to accommodate the request of the 
Member.  I would, therefore, urge the hon.  Members to deeply reflect and allow me 
to proceed with the Business of the House.   Now, Matters Raised with Permission, 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla.  …(Interruptions)…  “Demand for Immediate Financial 
Relief Assistance for the People Affected  by Cyclone Fengal in Tamil Nadu. ”  
…(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…    No.  Nothing is 
going on record.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):  Si r, I wish to raise a matter of urgent 
public importance regarding the devastating impact of Cyclone Fengal on the districts 
of Chennai, Villupuram, Cuddalore, Ch engalpattu, Tiruvannamalai, Tirupathur, 
Krishnagiri and Dharmapuri.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Hon. Members...  …(Interruptions)…  One minute.  
…(Interruptions)…  Take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…   
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA:  The cyclone has caused widespread destruction, 
severely affecting infrastructure, agricultur e, and leading to the tragic loss of many 
lives.  …(Interruptions)…     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  One minute.  …(Interruptions)…  
  
Hon. Members, please.  …(Interruptions)…  First take your seat.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA:   These distri cts, which have faced the brunt of the 
cyclone, have seen extensive damage to homes, roads, railway lines and bridges, 
power lines, and agricultural land, leaving countless families in a state of distress.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Take your seat. …(Interruptions)… First, take your seat.  
…(Interruptions)…  I  f i n d  s o m e  m e r i t  i n  w h a t  i s  c o m i n g  f r o m  t h e  M e m b e r s .   M y  
problem is, and the Members would kindly a ppreciate, I have eight matters that have 
been raised.  And let me tell you th e matters that have been raised. “To discuss the 
recent controversy regarding Ajmer Sharif Dargah in Rajasthan; Concern over law and 
order situation in Sambhal, Uttar Pradesh;  Concern over law an d order situation in 
State of Manipur; Demand for special ca tegory status for Odisha; Concern over 
situation arising out of the recen t cyclone Fengal in Tamil Nadu. ” …(Interruptions)…  
One minute, can you bear with  me?  You are an experienced person. I am soliciting 
cooperation of the House, to get feel of the House how I should proceed.  Please take 
your seat.  Then, “To discuss the allegation of co rruption against Adani Group; 
Concern over deterioration of law and order situation and rise in crimes in Delhi; Need 
for special assistance to address the plight  of people of Wayanad; Concern over 
atrocities on Hindus in Bangladesh attacks on their temples and arrest of ISKCON 
priest.” Now, hon. Members, one minute. …(Interruptions)… L i s t e n  t o  m e .   
…(Interruptions)…  N o w ,  h o n .  M e m b e r s ,  s o m e  o f  t hese issues are already listed in 
Zero Hour. …(Interruptions)…  The same Member. …(Interruptions)… No.  
…(Interruptions)… Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav.  Others may take their seats.  
…(Interruptions)…  Ģोफे सर साहब, पहले आप मागर्दशर्न दीिजए िक मȅ इन मुǈȗ क े बारे मȂ क्या 
करू ँ?  आप  Ģिकर्या बताइए।  O t h e r s  m a y  p l e
a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t s .   V a i k o j i ,   t a k e  y o u r  
seat.  मेरा सुझाव यह है िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
   
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, this is very serious.  …(Interruptions)…   
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
15

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Vaikoji. …(Interruptions)… Is it a competition between you both?  
Can’t you take your seat? …(Interruptions)… Nothing is going on record.  
…(Interruptions)…  Now, Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav.  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश ):  सर, संभल क े मामले मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : नहीं, नहीं, पहले आप मेरा मागर्दशर्न कीिजए िक अगर मȅ आपको बोलने दूँ, तो और 
लोग भी बोलना चाहȂगे।  मेरा िनणर्य आ चुका है, मȅ आपसे अनुरोध कर चुका हूँ।  मȅ यहाँ तक 
अनुरोध कर चुका हूँ िक एक ही सदÎय ने रूल  267 क े तहत कई नोिटसेज़ िदए हȅ।  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव :  सर, वह गलत है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मुझे नहीं पता िक मȅ कौन-सा नोिटस Îवीकार करू ँ !  पहली
 बात तो यह है िक मेरे 
िलए यह असंभव है िक मȅ एक साथ चार को उस पर बोलने दूँ।  दूसरी बात यह है िक ऐसे सदÎयȗ 
की भी काफी संख्या है, िजन्हȗने ज़ीरो ऑवर नोिटस भी दे रखा है। मेरा आपसे अनुरोध रहेगा िक 
in Zero Hour, I will accommodate this. …(Interruptions)…  I will accommodate.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ģो. राम गोपा
ल यादव :  सर, पहले मुझे सुन तो लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  आप तो सवर्ज्ञ हȅ, आप 
सब जानते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  मेरी बात तो जरा सुन लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ģोफे सर साहब, िफर वह इक्वािलटी का िसǉांत वायलेट हो जाएगा।  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव :  सर, इक्वािलटी का िसǉांत वायलेट नहीं हो रहा है, क्यȗिक मȅ िजस म
ुǈे 
को उठा रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ आपको जीरो ऑवर मȂ अभी बुलाता हूँ। 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव : सर, जीरो ऑवर मȂ मुझे नंबर एक
 पर बुलाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मȅ अभी आपको बुलाता हूँ।  ये जो बोल रहे हȅ, इसके  बाद मȅ आपको बुलाता हूँ।  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव :  सर, वहां पर गोिलयाँ चली हȅ, लोग
 मारे गए हȅ, सब क ु छ हुआ है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी सभापित : मȅ जीरो ऑवर मȂ अभी आपको बुलाता हूँ। One second, please. 
…(Interruptions)… Bear with me. …(Interruptions)… So, Shri  M. Mohamed Abdulla, 
please complete. Then, Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav.  
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
Demand for immediate financial relief assistance for the people affected by 
Cyclone Fengal in Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I wish to raise a 
matter of urgent public im portance regarding the devast ating impact of Cyclone 
Fengal on the districts of Chennai,  Villupuram, Cuddalore, Chengalpattu, 
Tiruvannamalai, Tirupathur, Krishnagiri an d Dharmapuri.  The cyclone has caused 
widespread destruction, severely affected infrastructure, agriculture and led to the 
tragic loss of many lives.  These districts, which have faced the br unt of the cyclone, 
have seen extensive damage to homes, roads, railway lines, bridges, power lines, 
and agricultural land, leaving countless families  in a state of distress.  In the light of 
immense destruction caused by the cyclone, I urge the Government of India to 
provide immediate financial assistance of Rs. 2,000 crore for provision of essential aid 
to the affected communities, restore infrastructure and rebuilding agricultural sectors.  
This financial support is critical for rehabilit ation of the affected areas and for ensuring 
that the families affected by the disaster can recover quickly.  
 Additionally, I request that a Central Te am be sent to the affected areas to 
assess the damage in these districts and pr epare a detailed report on the extent of 
destruction.  The findings of the team are vital for planning and rehabilitation 
measures.  Furthermore, I request the Government of India announce ex-gratia 
payments to the families of those who have  tragically lost their lives due to the 
cyclone’s impact, as a mark of compassion and solidarity.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri M. Moha med Abdulla:  Dr. V.  Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shri   Saket  Gokhale,  (Wes t Bengal),   Shri  Sandosh   Kumar  P,  (Kerala),  
Shrimati Mahua Maji, (Jharkhand), Shri Niranjan Bishi, (Odisha), Shrimati Phulo Devi 
Netam, (Chhattisgarh), Dr. M. Thambidurai,  (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson, (Tamil 
Nadu),  Shrimati  Jebi Mather Hisham (Ker ala), Dr. Fauzia Khan, (Maharashtra), 
Shri  Haris  Beeran,  (Kerala),  Shri  Anil  Kumar  Yadav  Mandadi,  (Telangana),  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
17

Shri A. A. Rahim, (Kerala), Shri Sanjay Ya dav, (Bihar), Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar,  
(Tamil Nadu),  Shri R. Girirajan,  (Tamil Nadu),  Shri  N.R. Elango, (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr.  Kanimozhi  N V N  Somu,  (Tamil Nadu),   Shri   Tiruchi   Siva,  (Tamil Nadu),  
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati Sagarika  Ghose, (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen, 
(West Bengal),  Shrimati Mausam B Noor, (West Bengal) and Dr. Sasmit Patra, 
(Odisha) and Shri Jose K. Mani(Kerala).   
                                   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Vaiko.  …(Interruptions)… Please.  …(Interruptions)… I will 
accommodate all.  Shri Vaiko came here in 1974.  
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu): Hon. Mr. Chairman, Sir, the situation in Tamil Nadu is very 
serious.  Flights suspended, trains disrupted and normal life in seven districts in Tamil 
Nadu was disrupted as Fengal Cyclone hi t Tamil Nadu and Puducherry.  There was 
heavy and very heavy rain in some distri cts due to which some areas were flooded 
and thousands of acres of standing crops were damaged.  The common people have 
to undergo untold misery in some districts,  especially in Cuddalore, Villapuram, 
Thiruvannamalai, and Krishnagiri where there was heavy rainfall.  Many persons have 
lost their lives and ten persons, including children, died in other districts due to 
electrocution and wall collapse.  The fish ermen in Nagapattinam and Mayiladuthurai 
did not go to sea, but their boats and fish ing nets were damage d due to cyclone.  
Fishermen are losing their source of livelihoo d as they are advised not to venture into 
sea. 
 There are extensive damages to standi ng crops as thousands of acres have 
been inundated and submerged in the flood water.  The standing crops have been 
completely damaged.  Vegetables and fruits grown by farmers could not be marketed 
due to floods and their produces have perished.  Rainwate r inundated several 
residential localities and many residents were stranded. 
The Army was requested to assist the National Disaster Response Force and 
the civil administration in rescue operatio ns. I would request the hon. Home Minister 
to rush the rescue and relief materials, send a survey team to assess the damages, to 
sanction adequate funds and grants to the Government of Tamil Nadu for the 
rehabilitation of the affected persons and to give compensation to the farmers so that 
normalcy can be restored at the earliest.     
                                 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The  following  hon.  Members  associated  themselves  with  the 
matter  raised  by  the  hon.  Member,  Shri  Vaiko :  Dr.  Sasmit  Patra  (Odisha), 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Shri   M.   Mohamed  Abdulla   (Tamil Nadu),   Dr.   V.  Sivadasan  (Kerala),  and  
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).    
           Now Shri Subhasish Khuntia. Next is Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav. Shri Subhasish 
Khuntia; demand to build an intern ational airport in Puri, Odisha. …(Interruptions)… I 
will accommodate everyone. If anyone rises, the accommodation will not take place.  
 
Demand to build an International Airport in Puri, Odisha 
 
SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA (Odisha):  Sir, I thank you for giving me the opportunity 
to draw the Government’s attention to the urgent need for an early operation of the 
proposed international airport in Puri. Unde r the visionary leader ship of the former 
Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik, th e Odisha Government submitted a detailed 
project report for the Puri international ai rport featuring world class facilities to the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in July, 2023.  The airport’s location was strategically selected 
due to Puri’s historical and spiritual sign ificance, particularly, as the home of the 
sacred Jagannath Temple and its numerous tourist attractions. This proposed 
international airport aims to cater to th e rapidly increasing number of tourists and 
pilgrims visiting Puri, which is globally reno wned for its cultural and religious heritage.  
Additionally, its proximity to the beach, fu rther enhances its potential to attract 
international and domestic visitors. The n ecessity of the airport was highlighted in 
2021, when the hon. Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik requested the hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi to establish an international airport in Puri. While the 
Odisha Government has completed forma lities including land acquisition and 
construction of boundary wall, no furthe r progress has been made to advance the 
project towards operationalization. On operationalization, the Jagannath Puri 
international airport will not only address th e growing travel demands of pilgrims and 
tourists, but will also provide direct air conn ectivity to Puri, facilit ating the exploration 
of its renowned attraction such as Jagannath Temple, Puri beach and nearby historic 
sites, like the Sun Temple at Konark.  
In the light of this consideration, I resp ectfully urge the hon. Minister of Civil 
Aviation to take necessary steps to expedi te the completion and operationalization of 
the Puri International Airport for the greater benefit of tourists, pilgrims and the 
region’s overall development.  Jay Jagannath Bande Utkal Janani.    
                                                             
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised  by the hon. Member , Shri Subhasish Khuntia:   Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Dr.  Kanimozhi  NVN  Somu  (Tamil Nadu),  Shri  Saket  Gokh ale, (West Bengal), 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
19

Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri M. Moha med Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mahua 
Maji (Jharkhand),  Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Shrima ti Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. John Bri ttas (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj  (Odisha), Shri Debashish Samantaray (Odisha), and 
Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha).   
                                                                       
MR. CHAIRMAN: Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav.  
 
Recent violence and law and order situation in Sambhal, Uttar Pradesh 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश) : Ǜीमâ, 19 नवÇबर को एक वकील साहब ने सÇभल मȂ, 
जहाँ एक 500 साल  पुरानी मिÎजद है, उसका सवȃ करने क े िलए मुंिसफ मिजÎटर्ेट क े यहाँ एक 
ऐिÃलके शन दी।  उसका सवȃ दो घंटे क े अंदर शांितमय तरीके  से हो गया।  24 तारीख को सुबह 6 
बजे पूरे सÇभल को प
ुिलस छावनी बना िदया गया। वहाँ लोगȗ को पता ही नहीं था िक यहाँ पुिलस 
क्यȗ लगाई जा रही है। थोड़ी देर बाद वहाँ क े डीएम, एसएसपी, वकील, िजन्हȗने वह ऐिÃलके शन 
दी थी और क ु छ लोग ढोल-नगाड़े बजाते हुए पुिलस क े साथ गए और मिÎजद मȂ Ģवेश कर गए।  
भीड़ को संदेह हुआ िक वे मिÎजद मȂ तोड़-फोड़ या और क ु छ करने जा रहे हȅ।  वहाँ जो पानी का 
टȅक था, उसको एसडीएम ने खोल िदया। जब वह पानी बहकर बाहर आया तो लोगȗ को संदेह 
हुआ िक इसमȂ क ु छ गड़बड़ी हो रही ह
ै।  उसके  बाद वहाँ अशांित हुई, पुिलस ने गोली चलाई, पाँच 
लोग मारे गए और बीसȗ लोग घायल हुए। िफर, सȅकड़ȗ लोगȗ क े िखलाफ मुकदमे कायम हुए, 
बहुत सारे लोग जेलȗ मȂ बंद हȅ और िजनको पकड़ िलया गया, उनको बुरी तरह से मारा गया।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ram Gopalji, this will not go on record. …(Interruptions)…
 राम गोपाल 
जी, मȅ आपसे आशा करता हूँ िक आप संयम बरतȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... You have made your 
point. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव : सुिनए, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member Prof. Ram Go pal Yadav:   Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Manoj Kumar Jha (Bih ar), Dr. Fauzia Khan  (Maharashtra), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), and Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala).  
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

    
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  You have made your point.  …( Interruptions)… Now, 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P - Demand to declare recent landslide in Wayanad district as 
calamity of severe nature under level–3 Disasters. …( Interruptions)… You have made 
yo u r p o i n t .   … (Interruptions)… Shri Sandosh Kumar P, go ahead. …( Interruptions)… 
Nothing is going on record ex cept Shri Sandosh Kumar P.  सर, आपने कह िदया है 
…(Ëयवधान)… You have made your point. रामगोपाल जी, आपने वकीलȗ पर कहा है, पर आप 
बहुत अच्छे वकील हȅ।  You have made your point.  Shri Sandosh Kumar P, please go 
ahead.  Only what Shri Sandosh Kumar P is sayi ng will go on record.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
Demand to declare recent landslide in Wayanad district as calamity of severe nature 
under Level-3 disasters 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala):  Sir, landslide which happened in some parts of 
Mundakkai Village in Wayanad, Kerala, is  unparalleled in the history of natural 
calamities in Kerala.  It took more than 4 20 lives, 109 lives are st ill missing and more 
than 1,000 buildings, including mosques, statues, school buildings, houses are 
completely damaged.  So, there is a reques t from our side to consider this as a 
Calamity of Severe Nature Level-3 Disaster.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी जावेद अली खान (उǄर Ģदेश ): सर, हम लोग बिहÍकार कर रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक हमȂ ज़ीरे आवर 
मȂ भी समय नहीं िमल रहा है।  
ﺟﻨﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺪ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ :ﺳﺮ، ﮨﻢ ﻟﻮگ ﺑﮩﺸﮑﺎﺭ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﮐﻴﻮں ﮐہ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ ﺯﻳﺮﻭ ﺍٓﻭﺭ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻭﻗﺖ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻣﻞ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔  
 
At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P:  And, we have submitted a plan of Rs.2,221 to 
rehabilitate affected people and places.   Sir, instead of declaring this as a Calamity of 
Severe Nature, we feel that the treatment of the Centre is a kind of cruelty of severe 
nature.  It is not supporting the State of Kerala.  The hon. Prime Minister was kind 
enough to visit the spot on 10 th August, 2024 itself.  But,  I am constrained to state 
that it has ended with some good photos and videos.  So, this kind of approach must 
be revisited.  We demand inclusion of this  calamity as Level–3 calamity.  And, Sir, 
Central rules related to natural calamities are illogical and impractical as far as our 
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
21

State is concerned.  So, there is a need to revisit these laws also.  Politics should not 
be a barrier to help the people of a State.  Of course, we all have political differences 
and it should not be a barrier in helping peop le of the State of Kerala.  Once again, I 
take this opportunity to request to include this as a Calamity of Severe Nature. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sandosh Kumar P:  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tam il Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. P. Suneer (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri mati Mahua Maji (Jhark hand), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala). 
  
MR. CHAIRMAN :  N o w ,  S h r i m a t i  S a n g e e t a  Y a d av - Need for promulgation of 
Government skills meant for women empowerment. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM:  Sir, …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I will come to you.  …( Interruptions) …   I  h a v e  t o  a d j u s t .  
…(Interruptions)… No, …(Interruptions )… One second, please take your seat. 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
Need for promulgation of Government schemes meant for Women's empowerment 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे मिहलाओं से जुड़े 
मुǈे पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करती हूं। महोदय, हमारे 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा मि
हलाओं क े सशƪीकरण क े िलए नमो डर्ोन दीदी, लखपित दीदी 
और ÎवाÎथ्य संबंधी अनेक योजनाएं चलाई जा रही हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Sangeeta ji, one minute.  Hon. Members are aware that when a 
particular matter is raised in Zero Hour, th at may be in the heart of many people.  
They associate …( Interruptions)…  Would you take your seat first? …( Interruptions)… 
They can associate, they can’t say anything.  …( Interruptions)…  That is the practice.  
Sangeet
aji, go ahead.  Only Sangeetaji will speak.  Nothing else will go on record.  
 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜीमती संगीता यादव : माननीय सभापित जी, सरकार ने मिहलाओं क े सशƪीकरण क े िलए कई 
महत्वपूणर् कदम उठाए हȅ, िवशेष रूप  से Îवयं सहायता समूह क े माध्यम से मिहलाओं को िवǄीय 
सहायता उपलÅध कराई जा रही है, लेिकन इन योजनाओं का लाभ अिधकतम तब होगा, जब 
इनकी जानकारी Ëयापक रूप  से हम गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ तक भी पहुंचा सकȂ । माननीय सभापित जी, 
हालांिक सरकार ने इस िदशा मȂ कई महत्वपूणर् कदम उठाए ह
ȅ, लेिकन अब समय आ गया है िक 
इन योजनाओं को ज़मीनी Îतर पर लोकिĢय बनाने क े िलए क ु छ और नए और Ģभावी उपाय िकए 
जाएं। जैसे िडिजटल Ãलेटफॉमर् क े माध्यम से, मोबाइल ऐप क े माध्यम से, सोशल मीिडया क े 
माध्यम से भी इन योजनाओं को जन-जन तक पहुंचाने का Ģयास हमȂ करना चािहए। साथ ही, 
गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ मिहला समूहȗ क े ǎारा एक जागरुकता  अिभयान चलाया जाए और इन मिहलाओं 
को टर्
ेिंनग क े ǎारा बताया जाए िक क ै से इन योजनाओं का लाभ वे घर बैठे उठा सकती हȅ।  
माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ यह भी अपील करूं गी िक Îथानीय भाषाओं मȂ इन योजनाओं क े बारे मȂ 
Ģचार-Ģसार को बढ़ाया जाए। साथ ही, सामुदाियक रेिडयो, लाउडÎपीकर, नुक्कड़ नाटक और 
पैÇÃलेट्स क े माध्यम से भी योजनाओं का Ģचार गाँव-गाँव तक िकया जाए। इन योजनाओं  
का Ģचार-Ģसार करने क े िलए Îथानीय जनĢितिनिधयȗ, पंचायतȗ को भी शािमल िकया जाए और 
यह सुिनिÌचत िकया जाए िक अिधक से अिधक मिहलाएं इन योजनाओं से जुड़Ȃ और इनका लाभ 
उठा सकȂ, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav:  Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (T amil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri  R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra),
 Shri Madan Rathor e (Rajasthan), Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
(Uttarakhand), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Ma hadik (Maharashtra) and Shri Niranjan 
Bishi (Odisha). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Pramod Tiwari; you have two minutes. 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान ): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत आभारी हूं िक आपने 
एक महत्वपूणर् और संवेदनशील िवषय, …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ģमोद जी, उसके  बारे मȂ बात हो गई है।  अभी-अभी मȅने बताया िक एक िवषय पर 
जब बात हो गई, your association will be taken note of. …(Interruptions)…   No, we 
cannot open the floor, …(Interruptions)… So, nothing will go on record. 
…(Interruptions)… Pramodji, nothing will go on record. …(Interruptions)…     Fir
stly, it 
will not go on record for a good reason. …(Interruptions)…  I cannot be parted to 
deviation from rules; I cannot. If a particular  Member has raised an issue first in point 
of time, in Zero Hour, ther e may be several Members raising it, they can associate. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
23

…(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record. …(Interruptions)…  Please take your 
seat, Priyanka ji, I will not allow; take your seat. …(Interruptions)…  You have to 
maintain discipline. It is not a pl atform that we can speak anything. …(Interruptions)…  
Please, take your seat, I am so sorry.  Shri  Shaktisinh Gohil- Concern over misuse of 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) in Ahmedabad. 
 
Concern over misuse of Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) scheme in 
Ahmedabad 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल ( गुजरात): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपकी इजाजत से एक बात उठाना चाहता 
हूं, जो दलगत राजनीित से ऊपर उठकर इंसानȗ की िंजदगी क े साथ िखलवाड़ करके  करोड़ȗ 
रुपय े कमाने की एक सोची-समझी सािजश क े बारे मȂ है और वह अहमदाबाद क े ख्याित अÎपताल 
मȂ की जा रही है।  वे क्या Îकीम चला रहे हȅ। वे गांव मȂ जाकर free medical camp क े नाम पर 
क ैÇप लगाते थे।  जब वहां गरीब लोग वहां जाते थ
े, तब वे उनको कहते थे िक आपकी हाटर् मȂ 
Åलॉके ज है।  कल ख्याित अÎपताल आ जाना, आपकी angiography करनी पड़ेगी।  िफर िजनको 
कोई जरूरत नहीं होती थी, वहां उनकी की angiography जाती थी और stent लगा देते थे।  उस 
अÎपताल ने Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना क े ǎारा करोड़ȗ रुपय े उठा िलए।   
महोदय, अभी क ु छ िदन पहले नवंबर महीने मȂ एक क ैÇप लगा।  वहां पर कोई अपनी पत्नी को 
िदखाने गया था और पित  को पकड़ िलया और कहा िक तुÇहारे हाटर् मȂ ĢॉÅलम िदख रही है।  जब 
ख्याित अÎपताल मȂ, िजनकी angiography और angioplasty हुई थी, उसमȂ से दो लोग मर गए, 
वहां पर  
(Ǜी उपसभापित पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
काफी लोग आईसीयू मȂ भतीर् करने पड़े, तब सरकार जागी और जांच ह
ुई, तो पाया िक इन्हȗने 
बार-बार ऐसा करके  Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना से करोड़ȗ रुपय े ले िलए हȅ और िजनको कोई 
जरूरत  नहीं थी, ऐसे लोगȗ की angiography और angioplasty करके  पैसे उठाने का षडयंतर् 
चल रहा था।  इसी अÎपताल मȂ 2022 म
Ȃ इसी तरह से क ैÇप से लाए हुए लोगȗ मȂ से एक Ëयिƪ की 
मृत्यु हो गई थी।  सरकार की िजÇमेवारी थी िक उसी वƪ अगर इस अÎपताल क े ऊपर कारर्वाई 
हो जाती, तो दूसरा हादसा नहीं होता।  आज काफी लोगȗ न
े जान गंवाई है।  अब अÎपताल मȂ जो 
main accused है, वह फॉरेन भाग गया है।  सर, पैसȗ से ज्यादा कीमत गरीब की जान की है। आप 
िकतना भी मुआवजा दीिजए, लेिकन उस गरीब पिरवार क े उन लोगȗ की, िजनकी जान गई है, 
उनको हम compensate नहीं  कर पाएंगे। £महोदय, मेरी सरकार से गुजािरश है िक दलगत 
राजनीित से ऊपर उठकर आप independent judiciary क े सुपरिवज़न मȂ  यहां पर सीबीआई की 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

जांच करवाइए, क्यȗिक यहां यह चीज़ बहुत गंभीर है। £सर, यह सरकार की िजÇमेवारी है िक वह 
सीबीआई से जांच करवाए। …(समय की घंटी)… ...(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil:  Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran  (Kerala),  Dr.  Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Mahar ashtra), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mand adi (Telangana) and Shri Ashok Singh 
(Madhya Pradesh). 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े - Concern over use of online gambling and 
betting in providing financial support to terrorism. 
 
Concern over use of online gambling and betting in providing financial support to 
terrorism 
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े ( महाराÍटर्) :  उपसभापित महोदय, अवैध इंटरनेट, जुए और 
सƺेबाजी की आतंकवाद क े िवǄीय समथर्न मȂ भूिमका है, इस पर मȅ अपने िवचार रख रहा हूं। सर, 
यह गंभीर मुǈा राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा से जुड़ा हुआ है।  राÍटर्ीय रक्षा िवÌविवǏालय की सुरक्षा और 
वैज्ञािनकी तकनीकी अनुसंधान की एक िरपोटर् मȂ यह उÊलेख िकया गया है िक अवैध ऑनलाइन 
सƺेबाजी और जुआ क ंपिनयां मनी लॉिंन्डर्ग और आतंकवाद क े िवǄ पोषण क े िलए एक साधन क े 
रूप  मȂ कायर् कर रही हȅ। अवैध ऑनलाइन जुआ और सƺेबाजी ऐÃस भारतीय िडिजटल 
उपयोगकतार्ओं को साइबर सुरक्षा हमलȗ और असुरिक्षत ऑनलाइन वा
तावरण जैसे कई खतरȗ का 
सामना करने क े िलए मजबूर कर रहे हȅ। यह भारत की राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा
 क े िलए एक गंभीर खतरा 
बन गए हȅ, क्यȗिक अवैध ऑनलाइन सƺेबाजी और जुए की वेबसाइटȂ मनी लॉिंन्डर्ग और 
आतंकवाद क े िवǄ पोषण का माध्यम बन रही हȅ, जैसा िक सुरक्षा और वैज्ञािनक तकनीकी 
अनुसंधान संघ ( एसएएसटीआरए) ने बताया है। वतर्मान कानूनी और िनयामक ढांचा वैध और 
अवैध गितिविधयȗ क
े  बीच अंतर ÎपÍट नहीं करता, िजसके  कारण अवैध ÃलेटफाÇसर् को अकसर 
मनी लािंन्डर्ग जैसी अन्य अवैध गितिविधयȗ को बढ़ावा देने का अवसर िमलता ह
ै। भारत मȂ 
ऑनलाइन अवैध सƺेबाजी और जुआ वेबसाइटȗ क े िलए सरोगेट िवज्ञापन एक Ģमुख ĢवृिǄ बन 
चुका है। जुए और सƺेबाजी सेवाओं क े िवज्ञापन पर कानूनी Ģितबंध क े चलते ऑपरेटर वैकि
Êपक 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
25

तरीकȗ का उपयोग कर रहे हȅ। भारत सरकार को इन सभी राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा से जुड़े महत्वपूणर् मुǈȗ 
पर गंभीरता से ठोस कारर्वाई करने की आवÌयकता है। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यह बहुत िवषय गंभीर है। ये जो ऑनलाइन सƺे और जुए 
चल रहे हȅ, इनकी वजह से बहुत जगहȗ पर हमारी आने वाली पीढ़ी क े लोग इसके  िशकार बन रहे 
हȅ। इसके  माध्यम से बहुत सारा पैसा आतंकवाद और एंटी नेशनल एिलमȂट्स को जा रहा है। मȅ 
आपसे िवनती करता हूं िक यह मुǈा राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा क े िलए बहुत महत्वपूणर् है और इसके  ऊपर 
गंभीरता से तुरंत एक ठोस कायर्वा
ही करने की आवÌयकता है। महोदय, गाँव-गाँव मȂ मोबाइल क े 
माध्यम से और अलग-अलग तरीकȗ से 16-17 साल क े बच्चȗ से लेकर 25 तक  साल क
े  लोग 
इसकी चपेट मȂ आ रहे हȅ। इसका बहुत ही गलत तरीके  से उपयोग हो रहा है और यह हमारे देश 
की सुरक्षा क े िलए एक खतरा बन गया है। ...(समय की घंटी)...   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by th
e hon.  Member, Sh ri Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade:   Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Devendra Prat ap Singh (Chhatisgarh),  Shri Jose K. 
Mani (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),  Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand),  Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Shri Dhan anjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan),  Dr. Bhim
Singh (Bihar),  Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).
Ǜी उपसभापित :   माननीय राघव चǀा जी,   आपका िवषय है,   Concern Ov er Prevailing 
Issue of Air Pollution in North India And Its Impact. Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी, Ǜी मानस 
रंजन मंगराज, Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन, Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल आपके  िवषय क े साथ 
एसोिसएट कर रहे  हȅ। आप अपने िवषय को सदन मȂ रेज़ कीिजए।  
Concern over prevailing issue of air pollution in North India and its impact 
Ǜी राघव  चǀा (पंजाब) :  सर, आज उǄर भारत ने एक ध
ुएं की चादर ओढ़ी हुई है और हर सांस 
क े साथ हम न जाने िकतनी िसगरेट्स और बीड़ी का धुआँ अपने अंदर लेकर जा रहे हȅ। सर, एयर 
पॉÊयूशन िसफर् िदÊली का मुǈा नहीं है, बिÊक यह पूरे उǄर भारत का म
ुǈा है। सर, Ģदूषण सरहद 
नहीं समझता और आज िदÊली से कहीं ज्यादा वायु Ģदूषण भागलपुर, मुजÄफरनगर, िविदशा, 
नोएडा, हापुड़, िभवानी, िभवा
ड़ी, आगरा और फरीदाबाद जैसे इलाकȗ मȂ है। क्यȗिक एयर 
पॉÊयूशन का सारा दोष देश क े िकसान पर मढ़ा जाता है,  इसिलए  आज मȅ उस िकसान की 
आवाज उठाना चाहता हूं। सर, आईआईटी की एक Îटडी बताती है िक Îटबल बिनȊग वायु Ģदूषण 
का एक कारण है, इकलौता कारण नहीं है, लेिकन िफर भी सारा दोष िकसान को िदया जाता है। 
हम पूरा साल तो यह कहते हȅ िक िकसान हमारा भगवान है, हमारा अन्नदाता ह
ै, लेिकन जैसे ही 
नवंबर का महीना आता है, हम कहते हȅ िक िकसान िकर्िमनल है, इसको जेल मȂ डाल िदया
 जाए, 
इस पर फाइन लगाया जाए। इसीिलए मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक कोई भी िकसान जान-बूझकर 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

अपनी खुशी से पराली नहीं जलाता है, बिÊक मजबूरी मȂ जलाता है। इस साल तो हमारे सूबे पंजाब 
मȂ Îटबल बिनȊग इंिसडȂट्स मȂ 70% से  ज्यादा िगरावट देखी गई है, जबिक मध्य Ģदेश, उǄर 
Ģदेश, राजÎथान, हिरयाणा मȂ पराली जलाने की वारदातȂ बढ़ी हȅ। सर, पंजाब ने धान की खेती 
क्यȗ शुरू  की? पंजाब ने धान की खेती इसिलए शुरू  की, क्यȗिक देश मȂ अनाज की कमी थी और 
देश का पेट पालना था। धान की खेती से पंजाब का भारी नुकसान हुआ। हमारा पानी 600 फीट 
नीचे चला गय
ा, सॉइल िडगर्ेडेशन हो गया और वह भी तब हुआ, जब चावल हमारी खुराक नहीं है। 
सर, हम पंजािबयȗ की खुराक चावल नहीं है। धान की फसल काटने क े बाद जो पराली बचत
ी है, 
उस पराली को साफ करने क े िलए िकसान क े पास मातर् 10 से 12 िदन होते हȅ, क्यȗिक अगली 
फसल बीजन
ी होती है। अगर 10 से 12 िदन मȂ इस पराली को साफ न िकया जाए, तो जो अगली 
फसल है, उसकी यीÊड िगर जाती है। इसीिलए िकसान को मजबूरन पराली जलानी पड़ती है। 
अगर हम इसके  सॉÊयूशन की बात करते हȅ, जैसे हैÃपी सीडर और प
ैडी चॉपर जैसी मशीनȂ हȅ, उन 
मशीनȗ को चलाने क े िलए बहुत ज्यादा पैसा खचर् करना पड़ता है। दो से तीन हजार रुपए  Ģित 
एकड़ िकसान की जेब से लगते हȅ, इसिलए वह िकसान, जो आज खेती से अपनी लागत नहीं 
िनकाल पा रहा है, वह पैसा कहाँ से लाएगा? वह मजबूरी मȂ जलाता है और इसमȂ सबसे ज्यादा 
नुकसान तो उस िकसान और उसके  पिरवारȗ का होता है, िजसको उस जहरीली हवा मȂ सांस 
लेना पड़ता है। सर, मȅ इसका एक समाधान लाया हूँ। यह एक शॉटर्-टमर् सॉÊयूशन है। अगर हम 
पंजाब और हिरयाणा क े िकसानȗ को इस पराली से िनजात िदलाने क े िलए ढाई हजार रुपए  Ģित 
एकड़ देते हȅ, तो पंजाब का एक भी िकसान पराली नहीं जलाएगा। इसमȂ दो हजार रुपए  भारत 
सरकार देगी, 500 
रुपय े पंजाब सरकार देगी और हम इस पराली की समÎया का शॉटर् टमर् 
सॉÊयूशन पा लȂगे। इसका लॉन्ग टमर् सॉÊयूशन है - कर्ॉप डायविर्सिफके शन, यानी हमȂ धान की 
खेती से कॉटन, मक्की, पÊसेज़, ऑइल सीड्स की ओर बढ़ना होगा। हम एआई की तो बहुत बात 
करते हȅ, लेिकन एक्यूआई की भी बात करनी होगी। जैसे राजनीितक दल बूथ-बूथ पर रणनीित 
…(Ëयवधान)…      
                   
                                                       
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by Shri Raghav Chadha:  Sh ri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),  Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala),  Shri A.A. Rah
im (Kerala),  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav 
(Telangana),  Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),  Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala),  Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra),  Shri Sant Balbir Si ngh (Punjab),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala),  
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh),  
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala),  Shri Sanj eev Arora (Punjab),  Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odish a) and  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu  
(Tamil Nadu). 
  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
27

 
Concern over decline in Medal Tally at Olympic Games 
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhr a Pradesh):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, Sir, for allowing me to speak.  This is a very important subject. Despite 
substantial focus and an investment of a pproximately Rs. 500 crores in last three 
years for participation in the Paris Olympics  and, apart from spending more than Rs. 
100 crores for athletes, India, unfortunately, in the overall medal tally got a very 
d i s a p p o i n t i n g  r a n k  o f  7 1 .    T h i s  r a i s e s  a very critical question about our sports 
development strategy.  The situation highligh ts a very serious issue:  What is our 
strategy, as a country, to place ourselves in the global platform, especially when we 
are becoming the fifth largest economy?  We are already the fifth largest economy, 
but in line with that, on our international pl atforms in sports, as we can see, there is, 
certainly, a glaring inequality in the sports infrastructure and the strategic support.   
While elite athletes benefit from the worl d-class training and also medical support, 
grassroot sports remain under-funded and overlooked.  This limits the opportunity for 
young athletes in rural and disadvantaged areas.   India’s position in medal tally 
behind 70 countries underscores a lack of co mpetitive edge strategy and structuring, 
revealing systemic issues that need very urgent attention.   
 Sir, I have a few suggestions to the Go vernment.  At federal Government level, 
I think, each State has to see what is the strategy that needs to be provided and there 
is also a need to see  what gaps are there in corporate sports and other sport 
societies.  We need to do a diagnosis of all that and then prepare a roadmap for our 
entire sports pattern, in line with where our country is heading.   In line with that 
strategy, a proper structuring -- it could be  public-private partnership initiative where 
various authorities will be involved to make  a structuring for the people, the funding, 
the processes, etc., -- is required.  All thes e need to be evolved.   With that, I think, 
we must come back and show our capability to the globe.  Thank you.   
                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla:   Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala),  Shri Niranjan Bi shi (Odisha),  Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala),  
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),  Shri Jose  K. Mani (Kerala),  Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab),  Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),  Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).  
       
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Concern over the functioning of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) in Assam 
  
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam):   Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for 
allowing me to raise an important issue about Assam.   Assam  has been in the 
forefront since British Era  in the matter of its natural resources in the form of oil, coal, 
natural gas, tea, etc.                                                           
The Digboi Oil Refinery was establishe d by British. After Independence, the 
Government of India took up the thr ead and the ONGC, Oil and Natural Gas 
Commission, was formed.  The regional set-up of ONGC in Nazira was entrusted with 
the responsibility of exploration and prod uction of crude products in the North-
Eastern part of the country.   But, now, instead of expansion of its activities in a 
systematic design, some functions are bein g shifted to Delhi or other places.  The 
functions relating to tender, finance, logi stics, etc., are some of those functions 
which are being shifted. A strong resentment  has grown up in public mind for these 
actions.  
 I, therefore, urge upon the Government, through this Mention, to see to it that 
no activities or functions of Assam asset of  ONGC is shifted out to any place of the 
country. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Ajit Kumar Bhuyanji. The following Members 
associated  themselves  with  the  Zero   Hour Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shri  Ajit  Kumar  Bhuyan:  Shri A. A.  Rahim  (Kerala) ,  Dr.  John Brittas (Kerala), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale (Wes t Bengal) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand to construct flyover (RoB) at Birpara and Kamakhyagudi in West Bengal 
 
Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक (पिÌचमी बंगाल) :  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ अपने क्षेतर् क े एक गंभीर मुǈे 
को सदन पटल पर रखने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं।   अलीपुरǎार िजले मȂ दो महत्वपूणर् रेलवे 
Äलाईओवसर् हȅ - एक बीरपाड़ा जो अलीपुरǎार िजले क े मादारीहाट िवधान सभा मȂ है और दूसरा 
कामाख्यागुड़ी रेलवे Äलाईओवर, जो क ुमार गांव िवधानसभा मȂ है।  इन दोनȗ Äलाईओवसर् क
े  बाद 
गर्ामीण अÎपताल एवं Îटेट जनरल अÎपताल आते हȅ।  जो मैिक्समम एिक्सडȂटल पेशȂट्स होते हȅ 
या जो रोगी होते ह
ȅ, उनको Äलाईओवर नहीं होने क े कारण, आरओबी नहीं होने क े कारण उस 
जगह पर असुिवधा का सामना करना पड़ता है।  इसमȂ गंभीर समÎया यह है िक मैिक्समम पेशȂट्स 
आरओबी नहीं होने क े कारण वहां मर भी चुक े हȅ। 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
29

मȅ आपके  माध्यम से रेलवे मंतर्ालय को कहना चाहता हूं िक जÊद से जÊद इन दोनȗ 
Äलाईओवसर् को बनाने की कोिशश की जाए।  इसमȂ िजतनी भी जमीन की जरूरत  है, इसके  संबंध 
मȂ िजला Ģशासन और राज्य सरकार ने एक इंÎपेक्शन करके  उसकी िरपोटर् रेलवे को भेज दी है।  
इसके  साथ ही साथ मȂ बीरपाड़ा क े दलगांव Îटेशन पर जो डोलोमाइट भूटान से आती है, उसके  
पॉलुशन क े कारण बीरपाड़ा 1 और  बीरपाड़ा 2 क े जो मैिक्समम लोगȗ को दमा और क ȅसर की 
बीमारी हो रही है।  िजला Ģशासन इसकी िरपोटर् ऑलरेडी वहां द
े चुकी है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
मंतर्ालय कहना चाहता हूं िक दलगांव Îटेशन मȂ जो डोलोमाइट साइिंडग होती है, उसको जÊद से 
जÊद Îथानांतिरत िकया जाए।  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you, Shri Prakash Chik  Baraik. The following hon. 
Members associated
 themselves with the Zero Hour Mention made by the hon. 
Member, Shri Prakash Chik Baraik: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mausam N oor (West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri  Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Mo hammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), 
and Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand).  
 
Demand to enhance safety and security of Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 
Department of Atomic Energy, Kolkata 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal): Si r, there is a serious security threat 
to the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics.  The premier richest institution under the 
Department of Atomic Energy was estab lished by the eminent scientist, Meghnad 
Saha, and its foundation stone was laid by Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee.   
 Now, Sir, entire institution की वॉल का जो Southern part है, is a high security 
zone, and all the Departments of Atomic Energy Establishment are specially protected 
under Atomic Energy Act, 1962. िबधाननगर , िजसे कोलकाता मȂ सॉÊट लेक कहा जाता है, 
वहां उन इंिÎटǷूट्स क े Heads of the Departments चार बार पुिलस Îटेशन जा चुक े हȅ।  वॉल 
क े northern part क े बाहर क ु छ unauthorized लोग मौजूद हȅ और वे लोग वहां भारी तादाद मȂ 
पहुंच गए हȅ।  It is a serious security threat.  All are Rohingyas. All are Bangladeshi 
infiltrators. ...(Interruptions)... All are Bangladeshi infiltrators. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA:  Unfortunately , we are living in such a State where 
infiltration is being welcomed. ...(Interruptions)... हम लोग खुलेआम ब
ंगलादेश से लोगȗ 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

को भीतर आने दे रहे हȅ, तो इसके  ऊपर क्या होगा?  अगर ऐसे एटॉिमक इंिÎटǷूट क े बाहर भी 
रोिंहग्या आकर बैठ जाएँ ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject.  ...(Interruptions)... Please 
take your seat, Mr. Gokhale. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर्: और हम रोिंहग्या को वेलकम करȂ ,तो  )... Ëयवधान ...(पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ 
हर जगह वे फ ै ल चुक े हȅ ,आपको सोचना पड़ेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् : यह  एक sensitive issue है।  ...(
Ëयवधान)... यह एक sensitive issue है, 
because we are welcoming the Rohingyas in West Bengal. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Speak on the subject. क ृ पया आपस मȂ बात न करȂ।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् : आप  ही क े कारण आज ऐसी िÎथित बन गई। ...(Ëयवधान)... Internal 
security of West Bengal and also of th is country is under th reat because of the 
callousness of this Government.  They  are entirely re
sponsible for this. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, no. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् : ये क ै से घुसपैठ को बढ़ावा देते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... आज वे साहा इंिÎटǷूट 
ऑफ न्यूिक्लयर िफिजक्स क े बाहर बैठे हȅ, पुिलस कोई एक्शन नहीं ले रही है।  ऐसा मामला 
िकतने िदन चल सकता है? ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बंगलादेश की बात कर रहे हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
बंगलादेश क े िहन्दुओ
ं क े ऊपर अत्याचार की बात कर रहे हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... और िदन-Ģितिदन 
पिÌचमी बंगाल क े भीतर इन सारे बंगलादेशी घुसपैिठयȗ ने हमारा demographic design 
change कर िदया।  आज वे साहा इंिÎटǷूट क े बाहर बैठ गए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTA
CHARYA: The concerned Ministry should immediately evict 
those persons from that particular place.  It is my demand. हमȂ यह करना चािहए।  भारत 
क े एटॉिमक एनजीर् सȂटर क े बाहर रोिंहग्या बैठ जाएँ, यह क ै से हो सकता है?  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
31

क ै से हो सकता है, आप बोिलए? चार बार, िलखा हुआ है --  I am authenticating the facts -- 
चार बार पुिलस Îटेशन मȂ गए हुए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Shri Brij Lal, ‘Demand to adopt alternative means to 
address the problems of stubble burning’. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY:  Sir, I have a point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please. You are a very senior Member. It is Zero Hour. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY:  Sir, unfounded allegations have been made.  Let 
him authenticate them....(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We will examine it.Thank you. The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Samik 
Bhattacharya:  Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhark hand), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Shri Devendra Pratap Si ngh (Chhattisgarh), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar) , 
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujar at), Shri Deepak Prakash (Jharkhand), 
M. Indu Bala Goswami (Himachal Pradesh) , Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), 
Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), Shri mati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar 
Pradesh),  Shri  Kesridevsinh  Jhala (Guj arat), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), 
Dr.  Kalpana  Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujarat), 
Shri Mahendra Bhatt (Uttarakhand) and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu).        
                                                                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now,  Shri Brij Lal. 
 
Demand to adopt alternative means to address the problem of stubble burning 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, 1990 क े दशक तक पराली हमारी 
समÎया नहीं थी।  जो िकसान थे, वे जानवरȗ क े चारे क े रूप  मȂ इसका सदुपयोग कर लेते थे। जब 
हम आलू बोलते थे, तो इसे उसके  ऊपर डाल देते थे और यह उसमȂ इÎतेमाल होता था।  आज 
पराली जलाने की जो समÎया है, वह पयार्वरण क े िलए एक बड़ी समÎया उत्पन्न कर रही है। 
...(Ëयवधान).
..   
 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, please. ...(Interruptions)... You are not 
authorized.  Please, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल : अब  पराली की समÎया क े िनदान क े िलए एक उपाय अÊटरनेिटव कर्ॉप है।  हमारे 
Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने िमलेट्स क े बारे मȂ बताया।  आज हमारा िमलेट िवÌव मȂ जा रहा है, इसका Ģयोग 
हो रहा है, यह ÎवाÎथ्य क े िलए लाभदायक है।  इसिलए अब हम लोग धान की जगह इसको 
लगाएँ।  हम धान भी लगाएँ, लेिकन साथ-साथ अगर हम िमलेट लगाते हȅ, तो इससे धान का 
रकबा कम होगा, पराली कम होगी और उसके  बाद इसका सदुपयोग हो जाएगा।   
 महोदय, पराली का एक बहुत बड़ा Ģयोग हमारे द
ेश मȂ ही ओिडशा मȂ, तिमलनाडु मȂ और 
पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ हो रहा है, जहाँ इससे मशरूम  प
ैदा िकया जाता है।  यह मशरूम  गमीर् मȂ, 35 से 
40 िडगर्ी मȂ पैदा होता है।  इसको पैडी मशरूम  कहते हȅ।  इसकी शुरुआत  हमारे यहाँ 1940 मȂ हुई 
थी और िवÌव मȂ पैडी मशरूम  क े रूप  मȂ इसका काफी Ģयोग हो रहा है।  हमारे देश
 मȂ ही पिÌचमी 
बंगाल मȂ, असम मȂ, ओिडशा मȂ, आंधर् Ģदेश मȂ, तिमलनाडु मȂ पैडी मशरूम  क े उत्पादन क े िलए हम 
िकसानȗ को Ģोत्सािहत कर सकते हȅ।  हमारा पूसा िरसचर् इंिÎटǷूट है - क ृिष अनुस
ंधान िरसचर् 
इंिÎटǷूट।  इसने एक डीकं पोजर डेवलप िकया है।  आप इस िडकं पोजर को पराली मȂ डाल 
दीिजए और दो हÄते क े अंदर पराली बहुत अच्छी खाद बन जाती है।  उस खाद का उपयोग 
िकसान अच्छी तरह से कर सकता है।  इससे उत्पादकता बढ़ती है और पराली का सदुपयोग हो 
जाता है। 
 महोदय, एक टेक्नोलॉजी और आई ह
ै, िजसमȂ पराली क े पैलेट्स बना िलए जाते हȅ।  हमारे 
तमाम थमर्ल पावर Îटेशंस इसका इÎतेमाल करते हȅ।  पराली का इÎतेमाल उसमȂ हो सकता है।   
 महोदय, हमारी तमाम गौशालाएँ हȅ।  हम इसको गौशालाओं मȂ दे सकते हȅ।  जानवर 
उसको खाता भी है।  जब पराली वहाँ पर सड़ती है, तो
 यह एक बहुत अच्छी खाद बन जाती है।  
हम तो गाँव क े रहने वाले हȅ।  इसका Ģयोग गाँव मȂ होता था और जैसे ठंडक आती थी, हम अपने 
घारी मȂ उसको िबछाते थे।  इससे जानवर को आराम िमलता था और वे इसको खाते थे।  उसके  
बाद होली तक इससे हमको बहुत अच्छी खाद िमल जाती थी।  ...(समय की घंटी)...  
                    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associat
ed themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Brij Lal: Dr.  Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Dr.  John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M.  Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia  Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Ram C
hander 
Jangra (Haryana), Ms. Indu Bala Goswami (Himachal Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakhand), Shri Deepak Prakash (Jhark hand), Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai 
Bara (Gujarat), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Dr.  Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri 
Haris Beeran (Kerala). 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Dhananjay Bh imrao Mahadik - Need to increase the 
Minimum Support Price of Sugar. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
33

 
Need to increase the Minimum Support Price of sugar 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक (महाराÍटर्) : उपसभापित जी, भारतीय चीनी उǏोग का एक लंबा 
और संपन्न इितहास रहा है। गन्ने से चीनी बनाना Ģाचीन काल से चला रहा है। भारत दुिनया का 
सबसे बड़ा चीनी उत्पादक देश है।  देश का चीनी उǏोग भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ एक बहुत ही 
महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाता है।  यह चीनी उǏोग देश क े करीब 10 करोड़ से ज्यादा गन्ना उत्पादक 
िकसानȗ क
े  पिरवार का जीिवका का साधन है। देश मȂ करीब 550 चीनी िमलȂ हȅ।  इस उǏोग से 
करीब 5 लाख लोगȗ को रोजगार भी िमलता है। हमारे देश मȂ हर साल करीब 360 स
े 400 लाख 
मीिटर्क टन तक शुगर का उत्पादन होता है।  2022-23 मȂ हमने करीब 60 लाख टन चीनी का 
एक्सपोटर् भी िकया था।  हमारा जो डोमेिÎटक शुगर क ं ज़ंÃशन है, वह करीब 260 लाख टन है।  
गन्ना उत्पादक जो फसल उत्पन्न करते हȅ, उसकी gross value करीब  80,000 करोड़ से भी 
ज्यादा है, लेिकन यह प
ूरा उǏोग climate change पर िनभर्र करता है।  कभी कम, तो कभी 
ज्यादा बािरश से इस उǏोग को भारी नुकसान भी होता है।  क Ȃ दर् की सरकार ने शुगरके न का 
price, यानी FRP, Fair and Remunerative Price िनिÌचत िकया है, जो recovery पर आधािरत 
है।  हर साल इसमȂ बढ़ोतरी होती
 है, िजससे गन्ना उत्पादक िकसानȗ को लाभ होता है। यह 
एफआरपी िकसानȗ को 2,800 से 3,300 रुपय े Ģित टन तक की इनकम िदलाता है।  इसी तरह 
गवनर्मȂट ने चीनी का  भी एमएसपी िनिÌचत िकया  है, जो 3,100 रुपय े है। िपछले 7 सालȗ से 
एमएसपी का र
ेट 3,100 रुपय े है। एक तरफ एफआरपी हर साल बढ़ रहा है, लेिकन चीनी का जो 
एमएसपी है, वह 3,100 रुपय े पर ही सीिमत है। इसकी वजह से चीनी िमलȗ को भारी नुकसान हो 
रहा है।  चीनी िमलȗ मȂ गन्ना crushing करने क े बाद जो चीनी िनकल
ती है, उसकी जो 
production cost है, harvesting,  transportation,  maintenance,  salaries and interest – 
यह 42 रुपय े से 45 रुपय े तक बढ़ गयी है।  आप समझ सकते हȅ िक production cost 42 रुपय े है 
और शुगर का selling price 31 रुपय े ही रहने से यह काम संभव नहीं हो रहा है। देश की सभी 
संÎथाओं ने, ISMA, National   Sugar Federation, महाराÍटर् साखर संघ ने सरकार से यह मांग 
की है िक चीनी का  सेिंलग Ģाइस, एमएसपी 42 रुपय े िकया जाए, िजससे गन्ना उत्पादक 
िकसानȗ को ज्यादा लाभ होगा और समय पर उनकी फसल का भुगतान भी हो पाएगा तथा जो 
चीनी िमलȂ घाटे मȂ चल रही हȅ या जो ची
नी िमलȂ बंद होने की कगार पर हȅ, उन्हȂ भी राहत िमलेगी। 
उपसभापित जी, हमारे देश मȂ जो चीनी िनिर्मत होती है, उसमȂ से 75 परस Ȃट चीनी इन Ģोडक्ट्स 
क े िलए यूज की जाती है – जैसे  सॉÄट िंडर्क, िबिÎकट्स, चॉकलेट्स, िमठाई आिद, जो आम 
इंसान की खास जरूरतȗ, जैस
े जीवन आवÌयक वÎतुओं मȂ नहीं िगनी जातीं। 
  ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik: Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Kalpana Sain i (Uttarakhand), Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dhola
kia (Gujarat), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(Odisha), Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju (Telangana), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),  Shri M.  Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim) 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Neeraj Dangi- Request to use Artificial Intelligence for 
monitoring the endangered wildlife species. 
 
Request to use Artificial Intelligence for monitoring the endangered wildlife species 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी ( राजÎथान) : महोदय, आज देश क े सामने वन्य जीवȗ को लेकर एक बड़ी चुनौती 
है और िवशेष रूप  से जो लुÃतĢाय हो रही Ģजाितयां हȅ, िजनमȂ टाइगर, लेपडर्, चीता आिद बड़ी 
िबिÊलयȗ की Ǜेिणयाँ शािमल हȅ, इन्हȂ क ै से बचाया जाए यह एक चुनौती है। 
महोदय, देश मȂ लुÃतĢाय वन्य जीवȗ, टाइगर, लेपडर् आिद क े संरक्षण हेतु उनकी िनगरानी 
आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस ǎारा की जानी चािहए। उसके  आकार, उसकी चाल आिद से यह पता 
लगाया जा सकता है िक वह कौन सा जानवर है, जंगल मȂ क्या गितिविध कर रहा है और कहाँ पर 
गितिविध कर रहा ह
ै। आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस संचािलत पहचान Ģणािलयाँ अिधक लागत Ģभावी 
भी हȅ और जो पारंपिरक तरीके  हȅ, उनकी त
ुलना मȂ इसमȂ कम कायर् बल की आवÌयकता होती है।  
इस Ģकार वन्य जीव संरक्षण हमारे पयार्वरण क े कÊयाण और भिवÍय क े मानव कÊयाण मȂ एक 
आवÌयक भूिमका िनभाता है। मȅ समझत
ा हूँ िक आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस का उपयोग अगर इन 
वन्य जीवȗ क े संरक्षण क े िलए िकया जाए, तो देश क े िलए इनका बहुत ही बेहतरीन संरक्षण होगा।  
हमȂ इंसानȗ को भी बचाना है और वन्य जीवȗ को भी बचाना है।   वन्य जीव जब जंगल क े आसपास 
क े गांवȗ मȂ घुस जाते हȅ, तब व
े मनुÍयȗ और उनके  मवेिशयȗ को नुकसान पहुंचाते हȅ और उस वजह 
से मनुÍयȗ का वन्य जीवȗ क े Ģित एक घृणा का भाव उत्पन्न हो जाता है। ऐसे मȂ अगर 
आिर्टिफिशयल इ
ंटेिलजȂस जैसी कोई पुख्ता 
 
(Ǜी सभापित पीठासीन हुए। ) 
 
ËयवÎथा की जाती है, तो मȅ समझता हूँ िक वन्य जीवȗ को और मनुÍयȗ को, दोनȗ को बचाने का 
कायर् इस Ģणाली से िकया जा सकता है।  अभी हाल ही मȂ रणथÇभौर क े अन्दर देखा गया िक 25 
बाघȗ क े लापता होने की खबर आई। ...(समय की घंटी)...   
                                                                     
MR. CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with the 
matter raised by Shri Neeraj Dangi:  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala),  Shrima ti Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Phulo De vi Netam (Chhattisgarh) and Shri Saket 
Gokhale (West Bengal). 
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
35

 
12.00 Noon 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Q. No.76.  It is not often that a Minister has seven questions, in a 
row, listed in his name.  The Leader of the House has seven questions in his name 
listed in a row.   
PM-PRANAM Scheme 
 
*76.    SHRI MADAN RATHORE: Will the Minister of CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the PM Programme for Restoration, Awareness Generation, 
Nourishment, and Amelioration of Moth er-Earth (PM-PRANAM) scheme promotes 
the sustainable and balanced use of fertiliz ers by adopting alternative fertilizers and 
promoting natural and organic farming; and 
(b) whether use of natural fertilizers help s in promoting crop production without 
affecting the quality of soil? 
 
THE MINISTER OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA): (a) and (b) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) Yes.  It is a fact that the Cabine t Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), on 
June 28, 2023, approved the “PM Programme for Restoration, Awareness 
Generation, Nourishment, and Ameliora tion of Mother-Earth (PM-PRANAM). ”  This 
initiative aims to support the mass movement  initiated by States and Union Territories 
(UTs) to preserve the health of Mother Earth through the promotion of sustainable 
and balanced fertilizer use, adoption of alternative fert ilizers, promotion of organic 
farming, and implementation of resource conservation technologies.  
The incentives to States/UTs for redu ction of consumption of chemical 
fertilizers (Urea, DAP, NPK, MOP) in a given financial year, comp ared to the average 
                                                            
 Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

consumption over the previous three years,  under the Scheme w ill be equivalent to 
50% of the fertilizer subsidy saved by the State. The incentives can be utilized on 
promotional activities (IEC) & R&D relating  to agricultural infrastructure and 
increase in the yield.  The remaining 50% of  the subsidy will be retained by Govt. of 
India. 
(b)   Indian Council of Agricultural Res earch (ICAR) promotes the sustainable and 
balanced use of fertilizers, by recommend ing soil test based integrated nutrient 
management through conjunctive use of bo th inorganic and organic sources.  ICAR 
develops both processes as well as produc ts in order to promote the use of bio-
fertilizers / bio-enriched organic manures. 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़ : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी से जानना चाहूँगा िक 
'पीएम Ģणाम योजना' क े तहत िपछले 3 वषș की औसत खपत की तुलना मȂ रासायिनक उवर्रकȗ 
जैसे यूिरया, डीएपी, एनपीके , एमओपी आिद की खपत मȂ कमी  होने से उवर्रक सिÅसडी की 
िकतनी रािश की बचत हुई है और इसमȂ से राजÎथान को िकतनी रािश दी गई है?  मȅ यह भी 
जानना चाहूँगा िक ' पीएम Ģणाम योजना' क े तहत िकतनी धनरािश िनधार्िरत की गई थी और 
िकतने लÑय िनधार्िरत िक
ए गए हȅ?  आप योजना की धनरािश क े उपयोग तथा उपलिÅधयȗ क े बारे 
मȂ भी सदन को अवगत कराएँ। 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : माननीय
 सभापित जी, यह जो योजना है PM Programme for 
Restoration, Awareness Generation, Nourishm ent, and Amelioration of Mother-Earth 
(PM-PRANAM) - यह बहुत ही कर्ांितकारी योजना है और इसके  तहत देश क े िकसानȗ को एक 
नई दृिÍट और िदशा क े साथ िकसान की यीÊड भी बढ़े और धरती माँ की soil यानी  िमƺी की 
क्वािलटी भी बनी रहे - इस बात को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, इस कायर्कर्म को िलया गया ह
ै।  इस 
'पीएम Ģणाम' योजना को Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs ने 28जून , 2023 को 
चलाया
 और जैसा मȅने कहा िक nourishment, amelioration और awareness generation क े 
िलए इस कायर्कर्म को आगे बढ़ाया जा रहा है।  इसमȂ कोिशश इस बात की है िक हम बैलȂÎड 
फिर्टलाइजर organic और inorganic, दोनȗ का mixture यानी conjuncture का हम उपयोग कर 
सकȂ तािक धरती माँ की जो उवर्रकता है, वह भी बची रहे और इसमȂ िरसोसर् क े साथ-साथ नई 
टेक्नोलॉजीज़ का उपयोग िकया जाए - इस बात को ध्यान मȂ रखा गया है। जैसा माननीय सदÎय 
ने कहा िक क
े िमकÊस और हमारे इनऑगȃिनक फिर्टलाइजसर्, िवशेष करके  यूिरया, डीएपी, 
एनपीके , एमओपी - इसको कम करने क े िलए इस योजना को चलाया गया है।   उन्हȗने यह 
जानना चाहा है िक इससे राजÎथान को या द
ेश को िकतना फायदा हुआ है तो मȅ इस संबंध मȂ 
कहना चाहूँगा िक इसका Ģोसेस और फॉमूर्ला इस Ģकार से है - िपछले तीन वषș का 
consumption average िनकालकर  और इस वषर् यूिरया का जो consumption हुआ है, उसको 
िनकालने क े बाद इसमȂ जो कमी हुई है, िजतना य
ूिरया कम उपयोग हुआ है, उसकी सिÅसडी का 
50 परसȂट Îटेट को जाएगा और 50 परसȂट सȂटर को जाएगा। ये दोनȗ ही जो पैसा है, वह सारे का 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
37

सारा for the construction and promotion of the agricultural products और एगर्ीकÊचर को 
बढ़ावा देने क े िलए, उसके  अवेयरनेस क े िलए, IEC क े िलए, उसके  R&D क े िलए - इन सब 
चीजȗ मȂ वह पैसा खचर् होने वाला है from the State and fr om the Centre also.  इस तरीके  से 
इस कायर्कर्म को आगे चलाया जा रहा है।  मȅ यहाँ यह भी बताना चाहूँगा िक इसमȂ जो ICAR 
(Indian Council for Agriculture Research) है, उसकी एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् भूिमका है।  वह 
महत्वपूणर् भूिमका यह है िक वह soil nutrient capacity को इवेलुएट करती है और इवेलुएट करने 
क े बाद उस soil की जो अलग-अलग evaluatio
ns आती हȅ, उनके  अनुसार conjunctures मȂ 
िकतना organic और िकतना inorganic उपयोग करना है, इसके  बारे म
Ȃ वह हमȂ बताती है और 
उसके  अनुसार हम उसके  Ģोसेस और Ģॉडक्ट्स को Ģमोट करने की कोिशश करते हȅ तथा bio-
fertilizers और bio-enriched organic manures - इन दोनȗ क े उपयोग क े बारे मȂ बताते हȅ। अभी 
मȅ क ेवल इतना ही कहूंगा िक चूंिक इसमȂ िपछले तीन साल का एवरेज िनकालना है, इसिलए यह 
कायर्कर्म िपछले खरीफ सीजन से शुरू  हुआ है और िपछले खरीफ सीजन, रबी सीजन, िफर 
खरीफ सीजन और अब यह रबी सीजन चल रहा है, तो  इसका जो क ंजÇÃशन है, उसके  एवरेज क े 
अनुसार इस साल का एवरेज िनकाला जाएगा।  अभी यह िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ़ एक्सपȂिडचर क े पास है 
और यह बहुत advanced stage of consideration है।   मȅ सदन को यह जरूर  सूिचत करना 
चाहता हूं िक " पीएम-Ģणाम योजना" क े बहुत ही पॉिजिटव िरजÊट्स आए हȅ और लोगȗ ने 
ऑगȃिनक फिर्टलाइजर को भी उपयोग मȂ लाना शुरू  िकया है और इनॉगȃिनक फिर्टलाइजर क े 
उपयोग मȂ कमी आई है, लेिकन वह advanced stage of consideration है। Once that 
calculation is done, तो वह भी पैसा सारे देश को िमलेगा और राजÎथान को भी िमलेगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Shri Madan Rathore. 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़ : धन्यवाद मंतर्ी महोदय।  सर, मȅ यह भी जानना चाहूंगा िक "यूिरया गोÊड" क े 
नाम से सÊफर-लेिपत यूिरया की मांग, उपयोग और उपलÅधता िकतनी है? सÊफर-कोटेड 
यूिरया और नीम-कोटेड यूिरया का उपयोग िकतना Ģितशत िकया जा रहा है?  मुझे यह भी 
जानना है िक आजकल कई Îथानȗ पर यूिरया क े जो पेटर्ोल पंÃस लग रहे हȅ, वे क्या हȅ, यह बताने 
का कÍट करȂ।  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : माननीय सभापित जी, इस ĢÌन का उǄर अलग से देना होगा, क्यȗिक 
यह एक अलग ही ĢÌन है, लेिकन क ु ल िमलाकर नैनो यूिरया और इस तरीके  क े Ģयोग चल रहे हȅ, 
तािक yield बढ़े, क्वािलटी बढ़े।  नये-नये Ģयोगȗ क े माध्यम से िकसान को एक अच्छी yield िमल 
सके , इस बात का Ģयास चल रहा है।  
   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, would the hon. Minister share the progress made in 
implementing the drone-based technologies  and also the smart-nutrient systems in 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

complementary initiatives like Namo Drone-Didi and how they align with the PM-
PRANAM objectives?  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : Sir, these are two different projects altogether.  
When we talk about PM-PRANA M Yojana, it is about the decision as to how much 
organic fertilizers and non-organic fertilizers are to be used.  It differs from place to 
place, area to area.  This is to promote th e usage of balanced fertilizers so that the 
sustainability of the soil is maintained.  This  programme is related to the quality of soil 
to be maintained and, for that, incentives are being given. 
 As far as Namo Drone Didi scheme is concerned, it is a programme where we 
see to it that the Nano Urea or other fert ilizers are sprinkled through the Drone Didi.  
The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers is also  part and parcel of it wherein we train 
Namo Didis for using this drone system and see to it that they ar e able to earn their 
livelihood and women empowerment takes place.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary, Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan. 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन : सभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी साहब से पूछना चाहती हूं िक 
"पीएम-Ģणाम योजना" धरती माता क े ÎवाÎथ्य को बचाने क े िलए है, िजसके  िलए हम सब भी 
िंचितत हȅ, क्यȗिक हमारी जो उपजाऊ िमƺी है, वह क ेिमकल और रासायिनक खाद क े कारण 
िदनȗिदन खराब होती जा रही है।  हम लोग vermi compost, जैिवक खाद और ऑगȃिनक खेती 
की बात करते हȅ, िजसके  बारे मȂ मेरी कई बार िकसानȗ से बात होती है।  मȅ आपसे यह कहना 
चाहती हूं िक ऑगȃिनक खेती, िजसमȂ उपज कम होती है, दूसरी तरफ आपकी कॉिÇपटीशन 
हाइिĤड से है। रासायिनक उपज देखने मȂ भी बहुत खूबसूरत लगती है और माकȃ ट मȂ जो चीज 
देखने मȂ अच्छी लग रही हो, लोग उसी की तरफ आकिर्षत होते हȅ।  िकसान हमेशा से यह कहता 
है िक अगर हम ऑगȃिनक खेती करते हȅ, तो एक तो वह मुझे महंगी पड़ती है और दूसरा, 
रासायिनक खेती क े मुकाबले उसकी उपज बहुत कम होती है।  वैसे िकसान, जो ऑगȃिनक खेती 
को Ģोत्सािहत कर रहे हȅ और खेती कर रहे हȅ, उनकी उपज की रेट अगर रासायिनक खेती की 
उपज से कम से कम तीन और चार गुना ज्यादा नहीं होगी तो वे ऑगȃिनक खेती की तरफ नहीं 
जाएंगे। अगर उसका रेट, जो रासायिनक खाद की उपज से कम कम से कम तीन से चार गुना 
अिधक नहीं होगा, तो वह ऑगȃिनक खेती की तरफ नहीं जाएगा। मȅ जानना चाहती हूं िक क्या 
सरकार ऐसी कोई योजना बना रही है? 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : सभापित महोदय, ‘पीएम Ģणाम योजना’ इनऑगȃिनक खेती को समाÃत 
करने क े िलए नहीं है। ऑगȃिनक और इनऑगȃिनक,  दोनȗ का balanced use हो और balanced 
use मȂ धरती
 की क्वािलटी और उसकी उवर्रकता बरकरार रहे, सÎटेनेबल रहे और साथ मȂ यीÊड 
भी बढ़े, इसिलए ऑगȃिनक खेती की दृिÍट से - It is not only to make it totally organic खेती - 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
39

इनऑगȃिनक और ऑगȃिनक, दोनȗ को िमलाकर िमǛण क े साथ...  और अभी डीएपी, यूिरया का 
ओवर यूज़ हो रहा है, उसका इफे क्ट हैÊथ पर आ रहा है, उसका इफे क्ट बॉडी पर भी आ रहा है। 
उसको कम करने क े िलए और balanced use हो, हम balanced use मȂ िकसान की यीÊड को 
कम नहीं करना चाहते हȅ। िकसान की यीÊड बरकरार रहे। इसीिलए ICAR (Indian Council for 
Agriculture Resear
ch) हमको बताती है िक िकस सॉयल की िकतनी nutrient base है और 
उसमȂ िकस चीज़ की कमी है। िजस चीज़ की कमी है, उसके  अनुसार वह conjuncture मȂ, 
mixture मȂ ऑगȃिनक और इनऑगȃिनक को िमलाकर - जब हम ऑगȃिनक को िमलाते हȅ, तो 
िनिÌचत रूप  से इनऑगȃिनक की खपत घट जाएगी। िजतनी खपत घटेगी, उसको सȂटर अपने 
पास नहीं रखने वाला ह
ै। उसकी सिÅसडी का सहयोग उसको िमले, तािक वह इस Îकीम को आगे 
बढ़ाने क े िलए इनकरेज हो सके । 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary, Shri Saket Gokhale.   
 
SHRI SAK
ET GOKHALE:  Sir, I just have a question because it pertains to the PM-
PRANAM Scheme.  
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Through you, I would like to ask the hon. Minister: Is it true that the Union 
Government has no separate Budget allo cation for PM-PRANAM and the funds that 
are going to be given are from  the money that the States themselves save on fertilizer 
subsidies?  Number two, ... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Only one question, please.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE :  It is a part of this question, Sir.  The hon. Minister talked 
about DAP fertilizers. There is  a massive shortage today of  DAP fertilizers in India.  
So, the question is: Is the PM-PRANAM Sc heme affecting the availability of DAP 
fertilizers?  Basically, Sir, Union Government का िकतना बजट है, Îटेट से िकतना आता है, 
यह मȅ जानना चाहता हूं । 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA :  Sir, this question pertai ns to the utility of the PM-
PRANAM Yojana.  It is not related to the Budget.  He can ask a separate question. I 
will answer accordingly.  Number  two, there is a separate question on DAP.  I will 
answer that.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, Q. No. 77.  
 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

New programmes for mental health awareness and care in the country 
 
*77. SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU: Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the Ministry has launched any new programmes to improve mental health 
awareness and care across the country, particularly in rural and underserved areas;  
(b) if so, the specific goals and timelines set for these programs and the budget 
allocated for their implementation;  
(c) the Ministry's approach for integratin g mental health care into the primary 
healthcare system; and  
(d) whether there are plans to increase the availability of trained mental healthcare 
professionals in public healthcare institutions and if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMI LY WELFARE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c)  The Government has launched a “National Tele Mental Health 
Programme” (NTMHP) on 10th October, 2022, that  would function as the digital arm 
of the District Mental Health Programme to provide universal access to equitable, 
accessible, affordable and quality mental health care through 24 x 7 tele-mental 
health counselling services. For this, a to ll-free number (14416) has been set up 
across the country. Specific objectives of the Programme are: 
 
(i) To exponentially scale up the reach of  mental health services to anybody who 
reaches out, across India, any time, by settin g up a 24x7 tele-mental health facility in 
each of the States and UTs of the country. 
 
(ii) To implement a full-fledged mental health service network that, in addition to 
counselling, provides integrated medical and psychosocial interventions.  
 
(iii) To extend services to vuln erable groups of the popula tion and difficult to reach 
populations. As on 22.11.2024, 36 States/ UTs have set up 53 Tele MANAS Cells. 
Tele-MANAS services are available in 20 la nguages based on language opted by 
States. More than 15,95,000 calls have been handled on the helpline number. Rs. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
41

120.98 crore, Rs. 133.73 cr ore and Rs. 90.00 crore has b een allocated for National 
Tele Mental Health Programme (NTMHP) for the year 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 
respectively. The Government has launched Tele MANAS Mobile Application on World 
Mental Health Day, i.e. 10th October, 2024. Tele-MANAS Mobile Application is a 
comprehensive mobile platform that has been developed to provide support for 
mental health issues ranging from well-be ing to mental disorders. The Government 
has established a dedicated Tele-MANAS Ce ll at the Armed Forces Medical College 
(AFMC), Pune to extend tele-mental heal th assistance and support to all Armed 
Forces service personnel and their dependen ts, further enhancing the mental health 
care services available to them. In addition  to the above, the Government is also 
taking steps to integrate mental healthcar e services at primary healthcare level. The 
Government has upgraded more than 1.73  lakh Sub Health Centres (SHCs) and 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs) to Ayushm anArogyaMandirs. Mental health services 
have been added in the package of servi ces under Comprehensive Primary Health 
Care provided at these AyushmanArogyaMandirs.  
 
The District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) is implemented under the National 
Mental Health Programme in 767 districts of the country to detect, manage and treat 
mental illness at District Hospitals. Facilities are also made available under DMHP at 
the Community Health Centre(CHC) and Pr imary Health Centre(PHC) levels and 
include outpatient services, assessment, counselling/ psycho-social interventions, 
continuing care and support to persons wi th severe mental disorders, drugs, 
outreach services, ambulance services etc. 
 
(d) Under the Tertiary care component of NMHP, 25 Centres of Excellence have 
been sanctioned to increas e the intake of students in Post Graduate (PG) 
departments in mental health specialities as  well as to provide tertiary level treatment 
facilities. The Government has also provided  support to establish / strengthen 47 PG 
Departments in mental health specialties  in 19 Government Medical Colleges/ 
institutions.  
For increasing the number of psychiat rists in the Country, Post Graduate 
Medical Education Board (PGMEB) of National Medical Commission (NMC) has 
issued the Minimum Standard of Requir ements for Post-Graduate Courses - 2023 
(PGMSR-2023) on 15.1.2024. For starting/ in crease of seats in MD (Psychiatry), the 
number of OPD has been brought down to 30 per day for annual intake of maximum 2 
PG students with 20% increase for each additional seat. Similarly, the minimum beds 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

required per unit for starting MD (Psychiatry) course with 2 seats, 3 seats and 5 seats  
in a medical college is 8 beds, 12 beds and 20 beds respectively.  
Under the National Health Mission, following types of incentives and honorarium are 
provided for encouraging specialist doctors to practice in public healthcare institutions 
in rural and remote areas of the country: 
• Hard area allowance to specialist doctor s for serving in rural and remote areas 
and for their residential quarters so that th ey find it attractive to serve in public 
health facilities in such areas.  
• States are also allowed to offer negotia ble salary to attract specialist including 
flexibility in strategies such as “You Quote We Pay”.  
• Non-Monetary incentives such as prefer ential admission in post graduate 
courses for staff serving in difficult areas 
• Multi-skilling of doctors is supported under NHM to overcome the shortage of 
specialists.  
The Government is also augmenting th e availability of manpower to deliver 
mental healthcare services in the underserved areas of the country by providing online 
training courses to various categories of general healthcare medical and para medical 
professionals through the Digital Academie s, established since 2018, at the three 
Central Mental Health Institutes namely National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro 
Sciences, Bengaluru, LokopriyaGopinathBordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health, 
Tezpur, Assam, and Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi. The total number of 
professionals trained under Digital Academies are 42,488. 
 
SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU :  Sir, could the hon. Minister explain the specific 
strategies we were using to help people in our villages and small towns to overcome 
the stigma around mental health?  How are we training local health workers, like 
ASHA workers, to provide sensitive and eff ective mental health support?  We know 
that mental health is a critical issue.  Can you share how the allocated Budget will 
make a real difference and States with hi ghest mental health challenges will see the 
most significant impact?  
  
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव : उपसभापित महोदय, यहां जो ĢÌन पूछा गया, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ बताना 
चाहूंगा िक रूरल  एिरयाज़ मȂ, गर्ामीण एिरयाज़ मȂ मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य की देखभाल क े िलए अनेक 
गितिविधयां होती हȅ। उसके  साथ ही आयुÍमान आरोग्य मंिदर मȂ जागरुकता  और िविक्षÃत िनवारण 
गितिविधयां, मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य िÎथितयȗ क े स
ंिदग्ध मामलȗ की पहचान और मनोसामािजक 
हÎतक्षेप से पहले िनधार्िरत दवाई भी िवतिरत की जाती है। सामुदाियक ÎवाÎथ्य अिधकारी ǎारा 
Îकर्ीिंनग क े बाद मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य िवकारȗ क े संिदग्ध मामलȗ को Ģाथिमक ÎवाÎथ्य
 क Ȃ दर् या 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
43

सामुदाियक ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃ दर् को रेफर करते हȅ और सहायता Ģदान करने क े िलए टेली परामशर् का 
भी उपयोग करते हȅ।  तो गर्ामीण रूरल  मȂ भी इसकी ËयवÎथा है।  इसकी देखभाल की ËयवÎथा 
ितर्Îतरीय की जाती है िक गांव मȂ Ģाथिमक देखभाल मȂ आयुÍमान मंिदर क े पास जो िǎतीय 
देखभाल होती है, वह िजला मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य कायर्कर्म से होती है, िजसमȂ सभी 36 राज्यȗ क े, 
संघ राज्यȗ क े क्षेतर्ȗ क े साथ लगभग 767 िजलȗ मȂ यह काम चलाया जाता है।  तीसरा, जो त
ृतीय 
देखभाल है, वह देश क े क ेन्दर् और राज्य सरकारȗ क
े  अंतगर्त 740 मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य संÎथानȗ क े 
मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ और एÇस क े माध्यम से मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएं Ģदान की जाती हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद, सेक Ȃ ड सÃलीमȂटरी। 
 
S H R I  R A V I
 C H A N D R A  V A D D I R A J U :    S i r ,  t e c h n o l o g y  i s  c h a n g i n g  t h e  w a y  h o w  w e  
access to health care.  Are we using digital platforms like telemedicine to reach out to 
people in remote areas who might no t have easy access to mental health 
professionals?  Many families struggle to understand mental health.  What steps are 
we taking to help community health care  workers help families support their loved 
ones with care, compassion and proper understanding?   
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा :  उपसभापित महोदय, हमारे माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने बहुत िवÎतृत जवाब िदया 
है।  इसमȂ साधारण तौर पर जो समझने वाली बात है, वह यह है िक हम लोगȗ ने primary health 
care को strengthen करने का Ģयास िकया है। Primary health care को strengthen करने क े 
िलए 1,73,000 आयुÍमान आरोग्य मंिदरȗ को National Quality Assessment Standards 
(NQAS) क े साथ Îथािपत कर रहे हȅ।  हमारी कोिशश है िक हम universal screening at the 
age of 30 
करȂ, तो उस universal screening मȂ dental, mental, diabetes, hypertension, 
diseases related to renal, cancer और cervical cancer की early detection हो  जाएगी।  
Early detection का मतलब यह है िक when a patient or a pers on comes for screening at 
the Ayushman Arogya Mandir, if there is so mething which is uncommon or unusual, it 
is taken care of by the ANMs, ASHA workers, and then, it is referred to the PHCs.  If 
it is not detected, then, it is referred to th e CHCs.  Then, it is referred to a district 
hospital and then to a tertiary health care facility.  Mass base मȂ problematic या high-
risk patients का detection हो जाता है। उस detection मȂ mental case भी आता है और उसके  
साथ-साथ हम उसको आगे बढ़ाने का Ģयास कर रहे हȅ।  
  दूसरा, इसको wider s
cale मȂ लेने क े िलए we have started a programme, which is 
known as National Tele Mental Health Programme, on 10th October 2022.  It is a digital 
arm.  यह digital arm है और digital arm क े िलए इसमȂ exponentially scale को reach out 
करने क े िलए, मȂटल हेÊथ क े िलए और 24x7 tele mental health facility दी जा सके , इस बात 
क े िलए इस platform का उपयोग िकया गया है। National Tele Mental Health Programme को 
लागू िकया गया है।  मȅ यहां यह भी बताना चाहूंगा िक mental health assistance क े िलए 22nd 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

November, 2024 क े अनुसार we have set up 53 Tele-MANAS Cells.  MANAS is Mental 
Health Assistance and Networking Acro ss States.  There are 53 centres.  
Consultation is done in 20 regional languages so that wider scale मȂ वह लोगȗ तक पहुंच 
सके  और उस हेÊपलाइन क े माध्यम से लोगȗ को इस बात की जानकारी िमल सके । इसी क े साथ-
साथ the Government has also launched MANAS Mobile application.  MANAS app भी 
लॉन्च िकया है। With this, video consultation is al so done.  This has been done for 
accessibility और accessibility क े साथ-साथ availability, affordability भी है, िजससे हर कोई 
उसका उपयोग कर सके । उसके  िलए free toll number है।  आप उसको डायल कीिजए और 
अपने बारे मȂ बताइए।  वह 20 भाषाओं मȂ टर्ांसलेट होता है। आपको िजस लȅग्वेज़ मȂ कहना है, उस 
लȅग्वेज़ मȂ किहए। मȅ आपको इसके  बारे मȂ एक और बा
त बताना चाहूंगा। W e  h a v e  g o t  
counsellors who are Masters in Clinical Psychology and Social
 Work, MS 
(Sociology), Bachelors of Psychology, etc.  When they are not able to detect the 
case, it is referred to the psychiatrist wh o is a senior consultant and a post-graduate 
with psychiatric qualification like MD, DNB Dipl oma, etc.  So, he is a highly qualified 
person. I am talking about Tele-MANAS at these 53 centres with 20 languages, where 
it is translated it into 20 languages for that consultation. उसी तरीके  से, we have got 
Clinical Psychologists who are first or seco nd class M.Phil. in Clinical Psychology, 
Psychiatric Social Worker, Psychiatric Nurs e with M.Sc. (Psychiatric Nursing).  So, 
these centres operate and I will say that this is a very revolutionary step because, with 
these telecommunication and these tele-centres, उन पेशȂट्स को, िजनको एक्सेस नहीं 
िमलती थी, हम उनको भी एक्सेस देने का Ģयास कर रहे हȅ। यह 24x7 चल  रहा है और हम इसे 
एक कायर्रूप  दे रहे हȅ, िजसके  माध्यम से ज्यादा से ज्यादा लोग इसका उपयोग कर सकȂ । 
महोदय, मȅ यह भी बताना चाहूंगा िक approximately 15,95,000 calls have been handled by 
the Helpline number. इस तरीके  से हमारा यह सȅटर चल रहा है at 53 centres. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I appreciate the Minister that Tele-
MANAS is connected in 20 regional languages. I would like to know from the Minister: 
Has any assessment been done State-wise regarding the postpartum mental health 
issue which prevails among women and the steps taken to addre ss the shortage of 
mental health beds in line with WHO recommendations?  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Sir, the assessment is a continuous process which 
we are doing. This programme started in 2022 and accordingly, our various 
organizations do the assessment,  which is continuously done .  But, at this point of 
time, the assessment report has not come as yet.  
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
45

Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल :  उपसभापित महोदय, यह बहुत ही इंपॉटȄट िवषय है, िजस पर 
सदन मȂ सवाल उठाया गया है। Regarding mental health, it is very critical especially for the 
women in the rural areas.  This needs to be addressed very careful ly.  What steps has 
the Government taken to increase the number of mental health counsellors across the 
country? उपसभापित महोदय, ये जो अलग-अलग योजनाओं क े बारे मȂ बोल रहे हȅ, उनके  बारे 
मȂ तो हमने भी कभी नहीं सुना है। जब रूरल  एिरयाज़ की मिहलाओं को ये ĢॉÅलÇस आती हȅ, तब 
उनके  िलए कौन-से ऐसे माध्यम हȅ, कौन-से ऐसे काउंसलसर् ह
ȅ, िजनके  माध्यम से इन ĢॉÅलÇस को 
सुलझाया जा सकता है? 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : माननीय  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सदÎया को 
बताना चाहता हूं और मȅ यह भी चाहूंगा िक हम सभी लोग - क्यȗिक हम सभी चुने ह
ुए Ģितिनिध हȅ 
और सभी लोग ऐसे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ काम कर रहे हȅ, इसिलए यिद आपको कभी मौका िमले या कभी 
Ģयासपूवर्क अपनी आशा वकर् सर् क े साथ जरूर  बात करȂ। यिद आप ऐसा करȂगे, तो आपके  ध्यान मȂ 
आएगा िक they are doing multi activities and mult i training is going on.  They are the 
first contact between the people and the Health Department.  हम  लोगȗ ने उन्हȂ टर्ेिंनग दे 
रखी है। They know all these things. आपके  ध्यान मȂ आएगा िक not only this, there are 
other things like tuberculosis, leprosy and other diseases.  वहाँ सबके  बारे मȂ, काउंसिंलग 
से लेकर सब क ु छ करने मȂ, हमारी जो आशा वकर् स
र् हȅ, हम उनके  माध्यम से सभी बातȗ को 
कÇयुिनके ट करते ह
ȅ। इसी तरह से हमारे जो पीएचसीज़ का निसȊग Îटाफ है या हमारे जो सब-
सȅटसर् हȅ, जैसे आयुÍमान आरोग्य मंिदर हȅ, वहां पर इन सभी की रेग्युलर टर्ेिंनग चल रही है। मȅ 
चाहूंगा िक आप आयुÍमान आरोग्य मंिदर िविज़ट करȂ और उन्हȂ सपोटर् करȂ। ये अपने-अपने 
एिरयाज़ मȂ सभी जगह पर हȅ। आप इन्हȂ िजतना ज्यादा सपोटर् करȂगे, उतना ही भारत
 का ÎवाÎथ्य 
सुधरेगा और हम उसमȂ सहयोग कर सकȂ गे। But from the Health Ministry, I would like to 
assure that the training is a conti
nuous process and it is going on in all fields.  यह  हम 
हरेक को बताते रहते हȅ  तािक उनका अपगर्ेडेशन हो और उस अपगर्ेडेशन क े माध्यम से, व े उन 
फ ै सेिलटीज़ का लाभ ले सकȂ । हम यह भी बताना चाहȂगे िक tertiary हेÊथ क ेयर की दृिÍट से, चाहे 
िनमहांस हो, चाहे तेजपुर का मेिडकल इंिÎटǷूट हो, चाहे रांची का मेिडकल इंिÎटǷूट हो, इन 
सबको हम लोगȗ ने strengthen िकया है। िनमहांस क े अंदर हाई क्वािलटी ऑफ िरसचर् भी चलती 
है। इसके  माध्यम से जो िनÍकषर् िनकालते हȅ, वे टर्ेिंनग क े माध्यम से नीचे तक जाते ह
ȅ। माननीय 
सदÎया, रजनी अशोकराव पािटल जी ने जो पूछा है, उसे लेकर मȅ इतना ही कहूंगा िक जो हमारा 
काउंसिंलग का Ģोसेस है, वह राइट ģॉम िद गर्ासरूट लेवल  होता है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद, माननीय मंतर्ी जी। सवाल पर अ
ंितम सÃलीमȂटर्ी – डा. भीम िंसह जी। 
  
डा. भीम िंसह :  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यह बड़ी ही महत्वाकांक्षी योजना है। सरक
ार ने 
िवÎतृत उǄर भी िदया है। इस योजना क े सफल होने मȂ जो सबसे बड़ी भूिमका होगी,  वह पेशेवर 
और Ģिशिक्षत कािर्मकȗ की होगी। सरकार Ģिशक्षण और िवǄ दे रही है, लेिकन सरकार ने अपने 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

उǄर क े खंड 'घ' मȂ Ģिशिक्षत पेशेवरȗ की जो संख्या बताई है, वह 42,488 है। मȅ समझता हूँ िक 
यह संख्या काफी कम है, तो सरकार सदन को बताये िक इतनी कम संख्या का क्या औिचत्य है? 
इसमȂ अिधक Ģगित हो, क्या इसके  िलए सरकार कोई िवशेष अिभयान चलाना चाहेगी?  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा :  सर, हम लोगȗ ने मैन पावर क े िलए यह कोिशश की है िक हमने िडिजटल 
Ģोगर्ाम चलाया है, िजसके  माध्यम
 से हम टर्ेिंनग दे रहे हȅ। हमारी कोिशश है िक ज्यादा-से-ज्यादा 
संख्या मȂ लोगȗ को टर्ेिंनग िमल सके  और इसमȂ हमȂ सफलता भी िमल रही है। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Q. No. 78 
 
Utilizaion of funds under JSSK 
 
*78. SHRIMATI SULATA DEO:   
Will the Minister of 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the details of allocation and utilization of funds under Janani Shishu Suraksha 
Karyakram (JSSK), State/UT-wise including Odisha; 
(b)total number of beneficiaries under the scheme, Sta
 te/UT wise;  
(c) whether Government has conducted any recent evaluation of the implementation 
and effect of the scheme; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) The details of allocation and utilization  of funds under Janani Shishu Suraksha 
Karyakram (JSSK), State/UT-wise including Odisha is placed at Annexure-I. 
 
(b)  The total number of beneficiaries und er the scheme, State/UT wise is placed 
at Annexure-II. 
 
(c) & (d) The Government assesses the im plementation of JSSK under National 
Health Mission (NHM) by undertaking period ic Regional/State level review meetings, 
field visits in various States/Union Territories (UTs) and Common Review Missions 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
47

(CRMs). Further, Government of India ha s taken following steps for effective 
implementation and strengthening of JSSK scheme; 
 Communications through multiple channels with State Governments including 
letters, videoconferencing, etc. 
 Popularizing the Scheme through Information Education &Communication 
(IEC) & Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) strategies including mass media 
 Field level workers like ANMs, ASHAs and CHOs are promoting this 
programme at the ground level through interpersonal communication 
 A system of regular supportive supervisory visits to the states and districts to 
monitor the implementation of JSSK has also been put in place. 
Annexure-I 
 
State/UT wise approval and expenditure for “Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram” 
under NHM for the FY 2023-24(In lakhs) 
S. 
No. 
State/UT JSSK-
Maternal 
Health  
JSSK-
Maternal 
Health  
JSSK-
Child 
Health  
JSSK-Child 
Health 
Approval Expenditure Approval Expenditure 
1 Andaman and Nicobar 4 - 0.5 - 
2 Andhra Pradesh 8174.58 6579.04 378 377.5 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1065.64 46.43 6.6 - 
4 Assam 10237.29 8278.09 1072.99 744.31 
5 Bihar 27094.59 10600. 77 328.06 149.06 
6 Chandigarh 142.18 - - - 
7 Chhattisgarh 2637.08 1757.42 130 68.74 
8 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman& Diu 61.81 36.16 12.6 - 
9 Delhi 782 352.63 109 25.2 
10 Goa 121.6 97.56 10 7.31 
11 Gujarat 6982.43 12044.09 1200 2292.02 
12 Haryana 1702.64 2077.74 106.63 91.71 
13 Himachal Pradesh 728.85 631.08 - - 
14 Jammu and Kashmir 3884.91 2026.75 541.34 220.6 
15 Jharkhand 10722.99 11355.83 550.39 813.13 
16 Karnataka 3936.14 2603.92 641.63 450.82 
17 Kerala 1376.78 1473.48 180.95 142.54 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

18 Ladakh 93.2 80.17 10 25.92 
19 Lakshadweep 8.93 12.76 8.38 12.78 
20 Madhya Pradesh 11280.62 8880.32 1300 1007.97 
21 Maharashtra 20684.13 11690.64 585.2 150.09 
22 Manipur 1038.01 289.14 42.6 - 
23 Meghalaya 1364.65 1472.98 131.5 134.89 
24 Mizoram 198.3 65.98 24.16 - 
25 Nagaland 530.73 424.35 32.5 3.2 
26 Odisha 6647.07 6638.45 501.62 521.73 
27 Puducherry 335.17 31.97 11 - 
28 Punjab 3764.37 3764.37 340 340 
29 Rajasthan 18411.02 15630.76 2449 1936.02 
30 Sikkim 120.98 112.83 9.1 20.8 
31 Tamil Nadu 20528.44 8520.07 1812.7 768.04 
32 Telangana 6838.59 3555.19 210 593.6 
33 Tripura 954.01 837.67 71.73 34.31 
34 Uttar Pradesh 63175.73 16649.77 187.04 29.4 
35 Uttarakhand 1862.57 1095.29 29.98 42.77 
36 West Bengal 18778.11 14164.25 886.81 1163.04 
Total   256270.1 153878 13912.01 12167.5 
Note:  
1. The above data is as per the available Financial Management Reports (FMRs) reported by the States/UTs and 
are provisional.  
2. Expenditure includes Expenditure against Central Release, Corresponding State share release & unspent 
balances at the beginning of the year. 
 
 
Annexure-II  
State/UT wise beneficiaries benefitted under JSSK scheme for FY 2023-24 
States/UTs Total number of Pregnant 
Women benefitted under 
JSSK 
Total number of Sick 
infants benefitted under 
JSSK 
All India 1,51,74,118 16,06,462 
Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 5471 437 
Andhra Pradesh 261001 43531 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
49

States/UTs Total number of Pregnant 
Women benefitted under 
JSSK 
Total number of Sick 
infants benefitted under 
JSSK 
Arunachal Pradesh 22734 938 
Assam 869382 61332 
Bihar 708846 45159 
Chandigarh 36591 7932 
Chhattisgarh 334711 42080 
Delhi 236546 9807 
Goa 29245 774 
Gujarat 752872 120779 
Haryana 436595 28256 
Himachal Pradesh 142051 19951 
Jammu and Kashmir 234207 50648 
Jharkhand 479257 21644 
Karnataka 583966 59755 
Kerala 558415 30703 
Ladakh 4637 922 
Lakshadweep 627 47 
Madhya Pradesh 1166711 118472 
Maharashtra 1254143 122307 
Manipur 19479 2110 
Meghalaya 146227 10622 
Mizoram 9394 1763 
Nagaland 12522 1116 
Odisha 730828 72718 
Puducherry 5543 1356 
Punjab 456890 33784 
Rajasthan 640801 110265 
Sikkim 4661 1103 
Tamil Nadu 849564 119011 
Telangana 187430 6895 
The Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman and Diu 14063 7219 
Tripura 43704 8718 
Uttarakhand 266803 14260 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

States/UTs Total number of Pregnant 
Women benefitted under 
JSSK 
Total number of Sick 
infants benefitted under 
JSSK 
Uttar Pradesh 2660050 165791 
West Bengal 1008151 264257 
Data source: HMIS portal, MoHFW, Government of India 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO:  Sir, I would like to  know from the hon. Minister the details 
of allocation and utilization of funds under Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) 
State-wise and Union Territory-wise incl uding Odisha and the total number of 
beneficiaries under the Scheme State-wise and Union Territory-wise, including 
Odisha.   
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव : उपसभापित महोदय, इसमȂ अभी तक जो रािश Ëयय की गई है, उसके  िलए 
2023-24 मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने मातृ ÎवाÎथ्य और बाल ÎवाÎथ्य क े िलए क ु ल 1,660  करोड़ रुपय े िदए 
हȅ। ओिडशा को लेकर जो सवाल पूछा गया है, तो ओिडशा मȂ भी मातृ ÎवाÎथ्य और बाल ÎवाÎथ्य 
क े िलए लगभग 71.60 करोड़ रुपय े िदए गए हȅ।  
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO:  Has the Governme nt conducted recent evaluation of the 
implementation and effect of the Scheme?  If so, the deta ils thereof and if not, the 
reasons therefore? 
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव : 
उपसभापित महोदय, भारत मȂ मातृ एवं िशशु सुरक्षा संक ेतȗ मȂ सुधार लाने 
क े िलए उÊलेखनीय Ģयत्न िकए गए हȅ। इसे लेकर जो वैिÌवक रुझान  हȅ, िनिÌचत रूप  से, उनमȂ 
हमारे देश की िÎथित काफी अच्छी है। मातृ मृत्यु अनुपात मȂ िपछले 30 वषș मȂ 83 Ģितशत की 
िगरावट आई ह
ै, जबिक वैिÌवक Îतर पर इसमȂ 42 Ģितशत की कमी आई है। भारत मȂ पाँच वषर् से 
कम आयु क े बच्चȗ की मृत्यु दर मȂ 75 Ģितशत की कमी ह
ुई है, जबिक वैिÌवक िगरावट दर 58 
Ģितशत से अिधक है। भारत मȂ िशशु मृत्यु दर मȂ भी 69 Ģितशत की िगरावट आई है, जबिक इसमȂ 
वैिÌवक Îतर पर 55 Ģितशत की िगरावट आई है।  नवजात मृत्यु दर मȂ 65 Ģितशत की कमी आई 
है, जो व
ैिÌवक Îतर पर 51 Ģितशत से भी अिधक है।  हमारे ǎारा बहुत सारे संसाधन और सुिवधाएं 
उपलÅध कराने से िनिÌचत रूप  से िपछले 5-10 सालȗ मȂ मातृ मृत्यु अनुपात, िशशु मृत्यु दर और 
नवजात मृत्यु दर मȂ बहुत कमी आई है।  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, the allocation under  Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram for 
Kerala is only Rs. 13.76 crores and for Maha rashtra it is
 Rs. 260 crores.  Kerala has 
spent hundred per cent.  For child health sect or, allocation for Kerala is only Rs. 1.8 
crore, but for Maharashtra it is Rs. 5 cror es.  Kerala has spent Rs. 1.42 crore, but 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
51

Maharashtra has spent Rs. 1.05 crore.  It means that their expenditure is below 25 per 
cent. My question is whether the Government has any data as to how many deserving 
women and children been kept out from th e benefit.  Do you have any idea to 
increase the amount for this project, Janani  Shishu Suraksha Karyakram?  This is my 
question.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Sir, I would like to make it clear that this programme 
is need-based.  The budget is not the issue.  So, don’t compare Kerala with 
Maharashtra.  It is population-based.  Every mother who has to deliver is taken care 
of.  I would like to say this on record.  I would like to explain it to everybody because, 
for general information, as we are public representatives, we should know...  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : We should know that the day a mother gets 
conceived, from that very day, the ante-natal check-up starts and all vaccinations 
needed before delivery are given to that moth er.  Three to four check-ups take place.  
One check up is to be done by Gynaecolo gist. So, there are four check-ups.  The 
high-risk patients have to have three more check-ups before delivery.  We also have 
to understand that on 9
th of every month, the district hospital has got the facility with 
Gynaecologist to do free check -ups of the conceived mother.  It is enunciated in the 
programme. It is the responsibility of ASHA workers to, especially, differently treat the 
high-risk patients as they need more check-ups and sh e has to ensure it.  The 
delivery is to be ensured in the institution.   When delivery takes place, and if it is C-
section, then the free-of-cost stay is for se ven days.  If there is a complication to the 
child, the stay is for ten days along with  child.  Transportation is given by the 
G o v e r n m e n t  o f  I n d i a .  A n d ,  f o r  c o m i n g  b a c k  t o  h o m e  a l s o ,  t r a n s p o r t a t i o n  i s  t h e  
responsibility of the Government of India,  Ministry of Health, along with the State 
G o v e r n m e n t .   S o ,  n o  m o t h e r  i s  l e f t  b e c a u s e  o f  l a c k  o f  f u n d s .   I n  K e r a l a  a l s o ,  i t  i s  
need-based.  And, I can assure you that  in Kerala also, every mother who has 
conceived will be taken care of.   
 
SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK:  Sir, I have some very alarming facts to place 
before the House.  The latest National Fa mily Health Survey has estimated that about 
one-third of children born in India are stunt ed, low in height for their age. About one-
third of children are also found to be und er-weight for their age and two-thirds of 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

children aged six to fifty nine months are found to be anaemic.  About 52 per cent of 
pregnant women and 57 per cen t of non-pregnant women are found to be anaemic. 
In view of this grave situation, I would urge upon the Government-- the hon. Minister 
also happens to be the Leader of the Hous e—whether it would take up these issues 
of children who are stunted, underweight, lo w in height and anaemic on a mission 
mode so that the issues are dealt with.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Sir, the Member, who is a very learned and a very 
senior Member, has generalised it. In  generalization, it becomes little 
sensationalization also. If you wish, I will gi ve you a separate st atement on what the 
situation is. But it is not so pessimistic. It is a very optimistic situation where I would 
like to share with the House that many programmes are being undertaken. 
Programme is undertaken in the name of POSHAN; programme is undertaken in the 
name of Bal Suraksha Yojana , early detection, etc.  All these things are going on and 
all financial support is being given to the States  for this.  So I will not say that it is a 
very gloomy situation, but it is not so pessimistic situation also.  India has taken a very 
good lead and my friend himself has told ju st now and gave you the figures that in 
infant mortality rate, maternal mortality ra tio, we are far better than the global 
standards and we are doing well.  So what I will say is that, yes, if you ask separately 
about stunted children, I will give you the an swer in that way. If you ask about the 
anaemic children, we will give you the an swer. But for all this, a very rigorous 
campaign is going on in the Ministry of Health with the support of the State 
Governments.  
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: Sir, I would like to ask a question from the hon. Minister.  
Are there any plans to involve community-b ased organisations and local Government 
bodies to monitor these schemes and make them more fruitful so that they reach out 
to more people?   I have seen from the an swer that the utilization amount against the 
sanctioned amount in many States is very  less. So, maybe, people are not aware of 
the scheme.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : Sir, the involvement of local self-Government and 
panchayat is there and the panchayat pradhan also sees to it that in the panchayat, 
he has to form a committee for health, he has to form a committee for sanitation, he 
has to form a committee for other things. Heal th is also a very important component. 
They are involved. As far as  the NGOs are concerned, mo st welcome, we are always 
there to welcome them. But, yes, they are not there to monitor. They are there to 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
53

support. The monitoring part is done by ag encies and they are third-party agencies. 
They are not part and parcel of the Health  Ministry because that has to be done by 
somebody else, a third-party. They tell us , you are wrong here or you need support 
here and you have to reform yourself here or bring some improvements in it.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Q. No. 79.  
 
Proposal for setting up AIIMS in Kerala 
 
*79. DR. JOHN BRITTAS: 
Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that the Minister of  Health and Family Welfare had stated in 
Rajya Sabha that Kerala is being considered  for setting up an All-India Institute of 
Medical Science (AIIMS);  
 
(b) if so, the progress that has been made in setting up the AIIMS in Kerala and the 
timelines thereof; and  
 
(c) the details of the location that has been identified for setting up AIIMS in Kerala? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA): (a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement  
 
(a) to (c)  Under Pradhan MantriSwasth ya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) are set up in different parts of the country  in a 
phased manner. Till date, establishment of 22 AIIMS have been sanctioned under the 
Scheme.  
Govt. of Kerala has identified and proposed four sites at following  locations for 
the establishment of AIIMS in the State: (i)Kinaloor in Kozhikode district (ii) 
Kattakada Taluk in Thiruvananthapuram distri ct (iii) Kottayam district (iv) Ernakulam 
district. The proposal has not been approved in current phase of PMSSY. 
Further, for strengthening and upgrading of tertiary healthcare facilities in 
Kerala, under another component of PMSS Y upgradation of following Government 
Medical Colleges have been approved by way of construction of Super Specialty 
Blocks (SSBs) on Centre-State cost shar ing basis: (i) Trivandrum Medical College, 
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Trivandrum (ii) TD Medical College, Alappuzha (iii) Kozhikode Medical College, 
Kozhikode. In addition, SreeChitraTiruna l Institute for Medical Sciences and 
Technology (SCTIMST), Trivandrum has also  been approved for upgradation by way 
of construction of Super Specialty Bloc k (SSB) on cost sharing basis between 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Department of Science and Technology, 
Government of India. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, yesterday was the hon. Minister’s birthday. The whole 
House greeted him and the State of Kerala is  in anticipation of a gift from hon. 
Naddaji. Sir, the Minister indirectly indicated in the House that the dictum now is, 
‘perform or perish’, and that  is why Kerala is not cons idered. Sir, I would request 
hon. Naddaji…(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please put your question. …(Interruptions)…  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, allow me to form it.  He is such an ebullient and erudite 
Minister. He should not depend on stale and bureaucratic statement which he gets. 
Sir, he is saying that four locations in Kera la are identified for se tting up of All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences  and he has not made up hi s  m i n d  y e t .  T h a t  i s  t h e  
answer.  Sir, the Central Government aske d the State Government to identify one 
location.  In 2017, the State Government wr ote to the Union Government saying that 
the AIIMS be set up at Kinaloor in Kozhikode and still he is going, I would say, behind 
2017. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you for your question. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, four months back, he  categorically assured this House that 
it is under active consideration of the Go vernment and soon an announcement will 
come.  That was his answer.  My question to him is whether he would impress upon 
his colleague, the Finance Minister, to announce an All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences in the coming Budget.  
  
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Sir, I am seized of the matter. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, what is the answer? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He has already replied, ‘he is seized of the matter’. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
55

 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, second supplementary, Dr. John Brittas. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  He is a man of words, as hon.  Chairman said yesterday.  Sir, 
the new NMC guidelines ma ndates -- He has been talking about the medical 
colleges. – hundred MBBS seats per ten lakh  population, which is detrimental to 
Southern States.  It is true that that or der has been frozen for a year.  Doesn’t he 
think that such an order will hamper the growth of medical education in this country? 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA :  This does not pertain to this question.  So, I will 
answer separately on that. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. 
 
Ģो . मनोज क ुमार झा :   शुिकर्या, माननीय उपसभापित महोदय।  बड़ा अǌुत संयोग है - िĤटास 
साहब का सवाल, मेरा सÃलीमȂटर्ी सवाल और सामने माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी।  मुझे बेहद खुशी 
हुई, जब आशाकिर्मयȗ क े बारे मȂ आपने इतने अच्छे तरीके  से बताया।  मेरा एक आगर्ह है िक आप 
उनका मानदेय बढ़ा दीिजए, वह मानदेय अभी बहुत कम है। सर, मेरा एक सÃलीमȂटर्ी ĢÌन है।  मȅ 
कोसी सीमांचल क े इलाके  स
े आता हूँ।  हमारे माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी िबहार से बहुत वािकफ हȅ।  
उस पूरे इलाके  मȂ, वहां की जो आबादी ह
ै, वह आप अगर देखȂ तो वहां से िदÊली एÇस तक पहुंचने 
वाले लोग बहुत हȅ, वहां एÇस की आवÌयकता है।  क्या माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी, कोसी सीमांचल 
क े पूरे इलाके  मȂ, जहां सहरसा ने उसके  िलए जमीन देने का भी ऑफर िकया
 था, क्या यह 
िवचाराधीन रहेगा, as a return gift for his birthday? 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा :  महोदय, अभी-अभी Ģधानमंतर्ी जी दरभंगा गए थे और उन्हȗने वहाँ एक All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences का भूिम पूजन िकया
 है।  उǄर िबहार को आप भी जानते हȅ 
और मȅ भी उस भूिम से बखूबी पिरिचत हूँ, वह िबÊकु ल कटा हुआ इलाका था।  वह िसफर् उǄर 
िबहार को ही क ैटर नहीं करेगा, बिÊक वह वेÎट बंगाल को भी क ैटर करेगा, नॉथर् बंगाल को भी 
क ैटर करेगा और वह नेपाल को भी क ैटर करने वाला है।  वह ऐसा All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences बनाया जा रहा है। 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN :  Sir, given the rise in attack s on healthcare workers across the 
nation, could the Minister elaborate on th e specific strategies being implemented to 
bolster security across AIIMS institutions all over the nation? 
 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA :  Sir, this question does not pertain to the main 
question itself but it is a very important question.  I think this needs a very elaborate 
discussion.  But, yes, Government of India is very sensitive about it. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Neeraj Dangi. 
 
SHRI NEERAJ DANGI :  H o n .  D e p u t y  C h a i r m a n ,  S i r ,  I  w o u l d  l i k e  t o  k n o w  f r o m  t h e  
hon. Minister: What is the Government do ing to address the shortage of specialist 
doctors and trained medical staff across all the AIIMS hospitals and also why has the 
Government failed to procure new medical de vices for AIIMS hospitals leading to long 
waiting periods for patients seeking tests and treatment? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA :  This is a general question.  I can’t answer.  Now, 
there are 22 All India Institute of Medical Sciences.  Now, you are talking about which 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences wher e the medical equipment is not there?  I 
would like to say one thing more and I would like to sensitize everybody about it. 
I would like to sensitize everybody about it. When we talk about All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, we are not opening a district  hospital. It is a hospital of national 
importance and an Institute of Excellence. I would like to share that All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences in Delhi came into existe nce in 1960s. But, Al l India Institute of 
Medical Sciences became a reputed institutio n in 1980s. It took twenty years to 
establish faculty, a department and form ing departments after departments. There 
were only 10 to 15 departments at that point of time. Slowly, in 80’s, there were more 
than 30 departments and now there are more than seventy five plus departments and 
specializations. So, what is the purpose be hind establishing All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences? The purpose is that if we  have opened an All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences in Bhubaneswar, the patien t should not come to Delhi, he should 
be taken care at Bhubaneswar, at Raipur , at Gorakhpur. So, we have to develop 
standards, and developing standards and facu lties take time. Sir, we are not diluting 
the brand of All India Institute of Medical Sciences. I would like to share with 
everybody that we have interviews, we call for interviews. The process goes on. If we 
call twenty of them, we find none found fit,  so we go for re-interview. But, we do not 
compromise and dilute the standard of All India Institute of Medical Sciences. I would 
like to say that. इसिलए थोड़ा Îलो Ģोसेस रहेगा, क्यȗिक एक इंिÎटǷूट को खड़े होने मȂ 10-20 
साल लगते हȅ, फ ैकÊटीज़ बनने मȂ समय लगता है।  क्वािलटी क े लोगȗ को लाना है, तो उसके  िलए 
उनकी बैकगर्ाउंड होनी चािहए, उनका अंडरÎटȅिंडग होनी चािहए, उनकी टर्ेिंनग होनी चािहए, 
उनकी सीिनयर
 रेजीडȂसी क ैसी हुई है, जूिनयर रेजीडȂसी क ैसी हुई है - all these things have to 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
57

be taken into consideration. So, we are no t compromising on the standards of it. As 
far as equipments are concerned, कोई भी equipment नीड बेÎड तरीके  से रुक  नहीं रहा है।  
I am personally monitoring it and seeing it.  If you will talk about any particular All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, I will give you the answer. But, yes, we are taking care. 
If there is a need for any equipment, it will be there and there will also be a person to 
take care of that. I would like to say that. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 80 
 
Fewer beds in hospitals  
 
*80. SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: 
Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether there are less number of beds per lakh population in the hospitals of the 
country;  
 
(b)  the steps taken by Government to increase the number of beds in hospitals in the 
country;  
 
(c) the number of hospital beds added since the COVID-19 pandemic;  
 
(d) the number of beds per 1,000 population, State-wise; and  
 
(e) the number of beds that would be added by 2029? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA): (a) to (e) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (e) As per IPHS norms, Primar y Health Centre (PHC) with 6 indoor/ 
observation beds is to be establishe d to cover 20,000 to  30,000 population, 
Community Health Centres (CHC) with 30 beds to cover population of 80,000-
1,20,000, Sub-District Hospitals with 31-1 00 beds to cover population of 1,00,000 - 
5,00,
000 and District Hospital with 10 1-500 beds to cover population upto 
30,00,000.Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS 2022) recommend provision of 1 bed 
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

per 1000 population. Health Dynamics of India 2022-23 report, which is published 
based on the data reported by States/Union  Territories (UTs), states that there are 
8,18,661 beds at PHC, CHC, Sub District Hospital, District Hospital and Medical 
Colleges in India as on 31.03.2023. The Stat e/Union Territories (UTs) wise details of 
beds available is provided as Annexure. Public Health and Hospitals are state 
subjects. However, the Government ha s provided substantial support for 
strengthening of Healthcare infrastructure in India. The details of the  schemes is as 
under: 
 National Health Mission (NHM) : Government of India has provided 
administrative approvals of Rs 5,293.35 Cr in FY 2021-22, Rs 5,435.82 Cr in FY 2022-
23 and Rs 6,263.07 Cr in FY 2023-24, to  the States/Union Territories (UTs) for 
upgradation and construction of Infrastructure.  
 
 Pradhan MantriAyushman Bharat Health  Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM):  
Under the Central Sponsored Scheme (CSS)  components of the scheme, support 
for 100 and 50-bedded Critical Care Hospital Blocks (CCBs) at district hospitals or 
medical colleges for an amount of Rs.1 1614.71 Crore have been accorded to 
States/UTs for FY 2021-22 to 2024-25 for setting up of 395 CCBs. Under Central 
Sector component of PM-ABHIM, 150 bedded Critical Care Blocks are envisaged to 
be established in 12 AIIMS and Institute of National Importance (INIs).  
 
 ECRP-II:"India Covid-19 Emergen cy Response and Health Systems 
Preparedness Package-II" (ECRP-II)  provided support for an amount of Rs.23,123 
Crore for the F.Y. 2021-22. Under ECRP-II to respond to the bed availability during 
Covid-19 pandemic, the following sanctions were given to theStates/UTs to improve 
bed availability in Public Sector Hospitals including Medical Colleges. The details are 
as under: 
 Total 37,834 ICU beds inclusive of 9,873 Paediatric ICU Beds , 7,008 Paediatric 
High Dependency Unit (HDU) Beds, 20,953  Adult ICU Beds in Medical Colleges, 
District Hospitals and Sub-Divisional Hospitals. 
 Additional 124,859 beds at the existing CHCs, PHCs and Sub Health Centres 
(6-20 bedded units); 19,337 Oxygen suppor ted Paediatric beds; Field hospitals (50-
100 bedded units) with 20,102 Beds. 
 26 Critical Care Blocks (CCBs) (50 bedded) in Hilly States in the Hilly and 
North Eastern State/UTs. 
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
59

 Pradhan MantriSwasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY):  Under the Pradhan 
MantriSwasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), there is a provision for upgradation of 
existing Government Medical Colleges/Instit utions (GMCIs) by way of setting up of 
Super Specialty Blocks (SSB)/Trauma Centres. So far, 75 such projects have been 
approved under the Scheme. Further, estab lishment of 22 new All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (AIIMS) has been approved under the Scheme. 
 Under Centrally Sponsored Scheme for ‘Establishment of new Medical 
Colleges attached with existing dist rict/referral hospitals’, a total of 157 Medical 
Colleges have been approved in the country.  
 Further, under AYUSH system of medici ne, 62,670 beds are available in the 
country.  
These measures has improved the overall Pub lic Health infrastructure in the country, 
including the number of beds for accessible and affordable quality healthcare. 
 
Annexure 
NUMBER OF BEDS AT PHC, CHC, SDH, DH & MEDICAL COLLEGES IN INDIA 
(Rural + Urban) 
S.
No. State/UT 
 (As on 31st March 2023) 
PHC CHC 
SUB DISTRICT/ 
SUB DIVISIONAL 
HOSPITAL 
DISTRICT 
HOSPITAL 
MEDICAL 
COLLEGE 
1 Andhra Pradesh 8712 6400 5400 2600 12583 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 397 594 N App 1151 350 
3 Assam 3166 6218 844 3677 9343 
4 Bihar 5596 8039 2459 4575 7251 
5 Chhattisgarh 5015 6726 629 3542 4458 
6 Goa 183 210 253 600 1342 
7 Gujarat 9422 11167 4492 3257 17899 
8 Haryana 2183 3079 1581 3647 3660 
9 Himachal Pradesh 1005 969 3665 1924 2632 
10 Jharkhand 1229 3647 534 3215 2900 
11 Karnataka 15112 6500 14530 6174 13712 
12 Kerala 5727 6371 8347 15113 7175 
13 Madhya Pradesh 8640 10590 9721 16650 5850 
14 Maharashtra 18276 15004 7903 4108 16998  
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

15 Manipur 420 365 10 551 1449 
16 Meghalaya 1127 867 40 1960 594 
17 Mizoram 655 240 70 903 500 
18 Nagaland 706 325 N App 1017 N App 
19 Odisha 1501 6290 1946 7288 9291 
20 Punjab 1688 3711 2509 3931 3160 
21 Rajasthan 13866 23820 2500 9474 17131 
22 Sikkim 257 28 N App 400 N App 
23 Tamil Nadu 10025 12582 21978 7695 29888 
24 Telangana 4662 3320 5400 2270 5960 
25 Tripura 918 630 900 1260 727 
26 Uttarakhand 2111 1699 2035 1511 1850 
27 Uttar Pradesh 13548 26157 N App 22812 14726 
28 West Bengal  7640 11205 13110 7599 25086 
29 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 230 210 N App 220 700 
30 Chandigarh 23 120 100 527 3096 
31 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
& Diu 
177 132 100 240 589 
32 Delhi 12 N App 431 9789 12060 
33 Jammu & 
Kashmir 3955 2769 N App 1862 5420 
34 Ladakh 320 190 N App 370 N App 
35 Lakshadweep 40 90 70 50 N App 
36 Puducherry 185 120 N App 1853 2794 
  All India/Total      
 
Note:   N App - Not 
Applicable 
  
     
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I would like to tell the hon. 
Minister, there have been reports that th ere exists a nexus between middlemen and 
hospitals run by the Central Government such as AIIMS, Delhi and Safdarjung 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
61

Hospital when it comes to hospital beds and patients are being charged Rs. 25,000 to 
Rs. 50,000 to book beds. Are these reports true and what steps are being taken by 
the Government to eradicate these hospital middlemen and brokers? 
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव :  महोदय, अगर ऐसी कोई भी िशकायत आती है, तो सरकार की तरफ से 
ऐसे लोगȗ क े ऊपर िनिÌचत रूप  से कारर्वाई की जाती है।  माननीय सदÎया ने अभी िबÎतरȗ की 
संख्या क े बारे मȂ जो पूछा है, उसके  संबंध मȂ मȅ आपके  माध्यम से पूरे सभागृह को बताना चाहूँगा िक 
2013 तक हमारे देश मȂ िबÎतरȗ की संख्या िसफर् 6,28,708 थी, जबिक 2014 से लेकर 2023 तक 
हमारे Ģधान म
ंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िबÎतरȗ की संख्या बढ़ कर 8,18,661 हो गई है 
यानी इन 10 सालȗ मȂ िबÎतरȗ की संख्या मȂ 1,90,000 की वृिǉ ह
ुई है।  िबÎतरȗ की कहीं कमी नहीं 
है।  अगर इस तरह का कोई इÌयू है और उसको हमारे सामने लाया जाएगा, तो हम िनिÌचत रूप  
से उसके  ऊपर कारर्वाई करȂगे। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Will the hon. Minister kindly tell us what percentage of 
funding of the PM Ayushm an Bharat scheme has been earmarke
d to boost 
Government hospital infrastructure in the financial year 2024-25 and how much 
funding has been provided to improve the infrastructure in the past five years? 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Are you asking about PM-ABHIM or PM-JAY? 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: No, I am asking about the funding provided under PM 
Ayushman Bharat scheme for developmen t of infrastructure of Government 
hospitals? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Sir, it is a sepa rate question. It is not related to this 
because she has asked about the situation of beds and my colleague has given a very 
exhaustive answer to this. As far as infrastructure is concerned, it is like this that there 
are various components in health departments for improving infrastructure.  For 
example, there is improvement of infras tructure under the project called as PM-
ABHIM.  Now, in PM-ABHIM, 64,000 crore rupees have been allocated  for the period 
of four years, 2021 to 2025.  And, in this, funds are being spent on various projects -- 
for Arogya Mandir, for PHCs, for CHCs, for district hospitals, for strengthening district 
hospitals.  The same way, there is a pr ogram which is taken under the  National 
Health Mission.  Now, under the National  Health Mission, programs are taken and 
infrastructure is also taken care of. So, th ere are various components for it and, in 
that, it is taken care of.  आयुÍमान भारत की जो Îकीम है, वह िसफर् हेÊथ क े कवरेज की Îकीम 
है, िजसमȂ हम लोगȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य की िंचता करते हȅ।  Twelve crore thirty-six lakh families, to 
say, 55 crore people have been given health  coverage of 5 lakh rupees per year.  
And,  another scheme is Pradhan Mantri Ja n Arogya Yojana. For that, every citizen of 
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

any caste, religion, of any economic background, above the age of 70, till he breathes 
his last or she breathes her last, will get heal th coverage of 5 lakh rupees per year.  
But, I am sorry to say that Governments of West Bengal and Delhi are not utilizing this 
service. But, we are ready fo r it.  The day good sense pr evails, the Government of 
India will be there to help the people of West Bengal and Delhi.   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय Ǜी नरेश बंसल जी, आपका सवाल। ...(Ëयवधान)...  Nothing is going 
on record.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल : उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी से जानना 
चाहता हूं िक ऋिषके श का जो एÇस है, वह उǄराखंड और पिÌचमी उǄर Ģदेश क े बड़ी संख्या मȂ 
मरीजȗ का इलाज करता है।  वहां मरीजȗ की संख्या भी बहुत बढ़ रही है, िजसके  कारण वहां पर 
एक-एक सÃताह तक बेड न िमलने क े कारण मरीज मैदान मȂ या इमरजȂसी एिरया मȂ रहते हȅ।  क्या 
सरकार ऋिषके श एÇस क े िलए मरीजȗ की संख्या क े आधार पर बेड और डॉक्टसर् की संख्या को 
बढ़ाने की िकसी योजना पर िवचार कर रही है?  यिद हां, तो उसका तत्संबंधी Åयौरा क्या है और 
यिद नहीं, तो क्यȗ? 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : सर, यह एक क ंटीन्यूअस Ģोसेस है।  माननीय सदÎय ने एÇस, ऋिषके श 
क े बारे मȂ कहा।  एÇस, ऋिषके श को Îथािपत हुए अभी लगभग 15 साल हुए हȅ और उसने कोरोना 
काल मȂ बहुत अच्छा काम िकया।  एÇस, ऋिषके श ने सारे उǄराखंड और आसपास क े इलाकȗ मȂ 
रहने वाले लोगȗ की जान बचाने मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान िदया है।  सर, हमारे यहां बेड का 
एक्सपȅशन और डॉक्टसर् का एक्सपȅशन एक क ं टीन्यूअस Ģोसेस है और अगर उसमȂ आवÌयकता 
रहेगी, तो हम उसे जरूर  करȂगे।  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN : Sir, I would like to ask an important question dealing with 
oxygen-supported beds.  In 2020, after the pandemic, the number of these beds was 
suddenly raised to a very la rge scale -- from 62,458 in April 2020, to 5,15,000 by 
February 2024.  Sir, but with all the new equipments that were purchased at that time 
in emergency, I feel that no budget has been provided for maintenance and 
sustainability of this expanded infrastructure. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Please put your question.  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN:  This is still lying, in many places, unused.  So, will there be a 
special budget for repair, maintenance, su stainability of hospital beds as well as 
ambulances, for which they don't have dr ivers, and that is why ambulances are 
standing in one place and not being used.   
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
63

 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, through you, I would like 
to enlighten the hon. Member that पȅडेिमक क े दौरान पीएम क ेयर क े Ģोगर्ाम क े तहत the 
funding was done.   That was done by the Government of India.  It was a one-time 
grant which was given.   Th e maintenance part is with the State Government.   But 
there are other schemes also where we take care of all these things.   We have got  in 
NHM, the Programme Implementa tion Plan.  So, the States have to come forward 
with their plans and programmes where they need to restructure and strengthen their 
on-going programmes, and, accordingly, the Government of India takes care.   But it 
is the State Governments which have to main tain and see it.  We will be always there 
to help.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : इस सवाल पर तीन ही सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन आए हȅ। अंितम और तीसरा सÃलीमȂटरी 
ĢÌन माननीय संजीव अरोड़ा जी का है।   
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: Sir, to increase the number of beds, we need medical 
professionals, paramedics and other supporting staff, which I understand is in 
shortage as of now.  Especially
, some AIIMS are also not working because of 
shortage of staff.   What steps is the Government taking to fill in these gaps? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Sir, I do not have the exact figures, but I would like 
to share with the hon. Member that from  56,000 UG seats which were there earlier, 
now we have got  more than 1,50,000 medi cal seats, subject to correction because I 
do not have the figures at this point of time. In the same way,  some 300+ medical 
colleges have come into exis tence in the past 10 years under the dynamic leadership 
of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi.   एक बहुत बड़ी छलांग लगाई गई है। यह जो बहुत 
समय से रुका  हुआ काम था, उसको आगे बढ़ाने का काम िकया गया है। Earlier, there were six 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences.    Now, we have got 22 All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences. इससे बड़ा लीप क्या हो सकता है? So, we are trying our level best.  
Figures are subject to correction, Arora ji, क्यȗिक वह मेरे पास दूसरे questions मȂ ह
ै, 
लेिकन अभी समय की कमी की वजह से उसको िनकालना मुिÌकल होगा, लेिकन approximately 
इतना ही,  100+ percentage of seats have been increased.  हम डॉक्टसर् तो पैदा कर ही 
रहे हȅ और कोिशश कर रहे  हȅ िक ज्यादा से ज्यादा डॉक्टसर् आएं। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Question No. 81.  
  
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Funds released to Regional Cancer Centres 
 
*81. SHRI M. SHANMUGAM:  
Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE be pleased  
to state: 
 
(a) the year-wise and Centre-wise details of funds released to Regional Cancer 
Centres under Health Minister’s Cancer  Patient Fund (HMCPF) and other schemes 
for the last   three years;  
 
(b)whether any public awareness campaig n is launched for pr evention and early 
treatment of cancer so that many patients  can be cured timely, if so, the details 
thereof; and  
 
(c) whether any steps have been taken for ensuring availability of cancer treatment 
medicines including procedures at reasonable  price, affordable to common people, if 
so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMI LY WELFARE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA):(a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement  
 
(a) The Ministry of Health and Family Welf are provides one-time financial assistance 
upto Rs.15 lakh for treatment of poor patients living below threshold poverty line and 
suffering from cancer through Health Minister’s Cancer Patient Fund (HMCPF) which 
is a component of the Umbrella Scheme of RashtriyaArogyaNidhi (RAN). The financial 
assistance is provided for treatment of th e patients at Regional Cancer Centres 
(RCCs) / Tertiary Care Cancer Centres (T CCC), State Cancer Institutes (SCI) and 
other Government hospitals/institutes having cancer treatment facilities. 
The year-wise and Centre-wise details of  funds released for the treatment of 
poor patients to Regional Cancer Cent res under HMCPF component of the Umbrella 
Scheme of RAN are at 
Annexure- I. 
The Central Government also implements the Strengthening of Tertiary Cancer 
Care Centers Facilities Scheme under National Programme for Prevention and Control 
of Non-Communicable Diseases in order to enhance the facilities for cancer care at 
tertiary level. Under this scheme, 19 Stat e Cancer Institutes (S CIs) and 20 Tertiary 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
65

Cancer Care Centers (TCCCs) have been a pproved. The status of funds released 
during the last three years is at Annexure- II. 
 
(b) Measures taken by Government to  create awareness are as follows:  
The Department of Health and Family We lfare, Government of India, provides 
technical and financial support to the States  and Union Territories under the National 
Programme for Prevention and Control of Non Communicable Diseases (NP-NCD) 
as part of National Health Mission  (NHM). The programme focusses on 
strengthening infrastructure, human resource  development, early diagnosis, referral 
to an appropriate level of healthcare fac ility for treatment and management and health 
promotion and awareness generation for prevention, of Non-Communicable Diseases 
(NCDs) including three common cancer (b reast cancer, cervical cancer and oral 
cancer).  
A population-based initiative for scre ening, management and prevention of 
common NCDs including three common can cer (breast cancer, cervical cancer and 
oral cancer) has been rolled out as a part of comprehensive Primary Health Care in 
the country under NHM. Screening of these common NCDs is an integral part of 
service delivery. Further initiatives fo r increasing public awareness about NCDs 
including cancer and for promotion of healthy lifestyle include obse rvation of National 
Cancer Awareness day, use of print, electronic and social media for continued 
community awareness.  NP-NCD gives financial support under NHM for awareness 
generation activities for non-communicable diseases to be undertaken by the 
States/UTs as per their Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs).  
  Healthy eating is promoted through Ea t Right India movement of Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). Fit India movement is implemented by 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, and various Yoga related activities are carried out 
by Ministry of AYUSH. 
 
(c) National Pharmaceutical Pricing Author ity (NPPA) fixes the ceiling price of the 
scheduled medicines specified in the first schedule of the Drug s (Price Control) 
Order, 2013. All manufacturers of scheduled medicines (branded or generic) have to 
sell their products within the ceiling price (plus applicable Goods and Services Tax) 
fixed by the NPPA. Further, as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013, the ceiling prices of 
scheduled medicines are revi sed annually on the basis of Wholesale Price Index 
(WPI). In case of non-scheduled formulations , a manufacturer is at the liberty to fix 
the maximum retail price of a non-schedu led formulation, branded or generic, 
launched by it. However, as per the provisions of the DPCO, 2013, the manufacturers 
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

of non-scheduled formulations are not allowed to increase the maximum retail price of 
such formulations by more than 10% per annum.  
NPPA has fixed the ceiling prices of 13 1 anti-cancer scheduled formulations 
included in Schedule I of DPCO, 2013 under National List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM) 2015 and 2022, out of which ceiling prices of 120 formulations are fixed under 
NLEM 2022 (including newly added formul ations like Bendamustine hydrochloride 
Injection 100mg, Lenalidomide Capsule 25mg and 5mg, etc.). This has resulted in the 
reduction of around 21.06% from the exis ting ceiling price under NLEM 2015, leading 
to annual savings of around Rs. 294.34 Crore to the patients.  
NPPA has also fixed retail price of 28 Anti-Cancer formulations as on 
28.11.2024 that are applicable to th e applicant manufacturing and marketing 
company.  
Further, NPPA vide order S.O. 1041 (E) dated 27th Februa ry, 2019 put a cap 
of 30% Trade Margin on 42 selected no n-scheduled anti-cancer medicines under 
‘Trade Margin Rationalization’ approach. By this approach, the Maximum Retail Price 
(MRP) of 526 brands of these medicines were  reduced by up to 90%. This resulted 
in annual savings of around Rs. 984 Crore to the patients.  
Also, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance has reduced the Customs 
Duty to Nil and GST rates from 12% to 5%  for the three anti-cancer drugs namely, 
TrastuzumabDeruxtecan, Osimertinib, an d Durvalumab vide Notification 30/2024 
dated 23.07.2024 (Sr. No III (iv)) and Notification no. 05/2024 dated 08.10.2024 
respectively. Accordingly, OM dated 28.10. 2024 has been issued by NPPA directing 
companies to reduce MRP on account of reduction in GST rates and exemption from 
Custom Duties to pass on the benefit of reduced taxes and duties to consumers.  
As per the Para 20 of DPCO, 2013, NPPA  also monitors the MRPs of all the 
non-scheduled formulations including anti-cancer formulations so as to ensure that 
no manufacturer increases the MRP of a drug  by more than 10% of the MRP during 
the preceding 12 months. Instances of overcharging are dealt with by NPPA under the 
relevant provisions of DPCO, 2013.  
All price notifications for the formulations  of which prices have been fixed by 
NPPA are available on NPPA web-site www.nppaindia.nic.in
. 
Further, treatment for cancer is also provided under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan 
Mantri Jan ArogyaYojana (AB PM-JAY). Under AB PM-JAY, cancer-related 
treatment is provided under three h eads Oncology – Medical, Surgical and 
Radiation. The number of treatment pack ages and procedures for treatment of 
Cancer in the national Health Benefit Package (HBP) is as follows: 
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
67

Sl. No. Speciality   No. of packages No. of procedures   
1. Medical Oncology 76 288 
2. Radiation Oncology 20 53 
3. Surgical Oncology 81 166 
4. Palliative Medicine 42 42 
 
 Affordable Medicines and Reliable Impl ants for Treatment (AMRIT), a novel 
initiative launched by the Ministry of He alth & Family Welfare aims to provide 
affordable medicines for treatment of cancer, cardio vascular and other diseases.  
Presently, there are 217 AMRIT Pharmacies spread across 29 States/Union 
Territories, selling more than 5200 drugs for cardiovascular, cancer, diabetes, stents, 
implants, surgical disposables, and othe r consumables, including 289 Oncology 
drugs at a significant discount of up to 50% on market rates. 
As on 15th November 2024, total 559 Lakh  patients have benefitted from AMRIT 
Pharmacies with a savings of Rs. 6,064 Cror es thereby reducing their out of pocket 
expenditure.  
Annexure- I 
Sl. 
No. 
Regional Cancer Centre 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-
25* 
1. Chittaranjan National Cancer 
Institute, Kolkata, West Bengal 
- 1 0.80 - 
2. Dr. B.R.A. Indian Rotary Cancer 
Institute, (AIIMS), New Delhi 
178 90 144.04 32.43 
3. Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Education & Research 
(PGIMER), Chandigarh 
- 24.10 15 - 
4. Sher-I- Kashmir Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Soura, Srinagar 
31 - - - 
5. Regional Cancer Centre, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 
2 - - - 
6. MNJ Institute of Oncology, 
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh 
- - 9.65 - 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

*As on 28.11.2024        ( i n  R s .  L a k h )   
 
Annexure - II 
7. Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra 
101 - - - 
8. Acharya Tulsi Regional Cancer 
Trust & Research Institute (RCC), 
Bikaner, Rajasthan 
3.75 - - - 
Statement Showing Balance Amount Payable under TCCC Scheme of NP-NCD (erstwhile NPCDCS) 
          (Rs in 
Crore) 
S 
No. 
State Name of 
the 
Institute 
SCI/ 
TCCC 
Amount 
recommend-
ded by 
Standing 
Committee 
Centr
al 
Shar
e 
2021
-22 
2022-
23 
2023- 
24 
2024- 
25 
Total  
amount 
released 
since  
2014-15 
1 Assam 
Guwahati 
Medical 
College & 
Hospital, 
Guwahati SCI 119.9 
107.9
1   15.5675  96.5 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Kurnool 
Medical 
College, 
Kurnool SCI 120 72     54 
3 Bihar 
Indira 
Gandhi 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences, 
Patna SCI 120 72 35.9627    69.0227 
4 Chhattisgarh 
Chhattisgar
h Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences, 
Bilaspur SCI 115.2 69.12     51.8377 
5 Delhi LokNayak 
Hospital TCCC 39.82 39.82  8.8448   38.7148 
6 Goa 
Goa 
Medical 
College, TCCC 45 27     20.25 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
69

14 
Karnataka 
Kidwai 
Memorial 
Institute of 
Oncology 
(RCC), 
Bengaluru SCI 120 72     67.5 
15 Mandya 
Institute of 
TCCC 45 27     17.257 
Panaji 
7 Gujarat 
Gujarat 
Cancer 
Research 
Institute, 
Ahmedabad SCI 120 72  4.5   72 
8 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Indira 
Gandhi 
Medical 
College, 
Shimla TCCC 45 40.5   25.63  40.5 
9 
Shri Lal 
Bahadur 
Shastri 
Medical 
College, 
Mandi TCCC 45 40.5     29.6362 
10 Haryana 
Civil 
Hospital, 
Ambala 
Cantt TCCC 45 27  6.75   27 
11 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Sher-i-
Kashmir 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences, 
Srinagar SCI 120 1 08 27.00    74.25 
12 
Government 
Medical 
College, 
Jammu SCI 104 93.6     70.2028 
13 Jharkhand 
Rajendra 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences, 
Ranchi SCI 51 30.6     22.95 
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Medical 
Sciences, 
Mandya 
16 
Kerala 
Governmen
t Medical 
College, 
Kozhikode 
TCCC 44.5 26.7   1.67  26.7 
17 
Regional 
Cancer 
Centre, 
Thiruvanant
hapuram SCI 102.35 61.4 1  14.453   61.41 
18 Mizoram 
Civil 
Hospital, 
Aizawl TCCC 44.27 
39.8
43  15.203   39.843 
19 
Maharashtra 
Rashtrasant
Tukdoji 
Regional 
Cancer 
Hospital & 
Research 
Centre, 
Nagpur TCCC 44.991 
26.99
46   
6.818
6  26.9946 
20 
Governmen
t Medical 
College, 
Aurangaba
d SCI 96.7 58.02  14.505   58.02 
21 
Vivekanand 
Foundation 
& 
Research 
Centre, 
Latur TCCC 45 27   
6.741
5  27 
22 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Netaji 
Subhas 
Chandra 
Bose 
Medical 
College, 
Jabalpur SCI 120 72     54.001 
23 
G.R. 
Medical 
College, TCCC 42 25.2     18.9 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
71

Gwalior 
24 Nagaland  
District 
Hospital, 
Kohima TCCC 43.5 39.15  19.4   32.63 
25 Odisha 
Acharya 
Harihar 
Regional 
Cancer 
Centre, 
Cuttack SCI 79.62 
47.7
72  11.943   47.772 
26 
Punjab 
Governmen
t Medical 
College, 
Amritsar SCI 114.61 68.766    
4.2
965 55.8765 
27 
Civil 
Hospital, 
Fazilka TCCC 44.71 26.826     20.119 
28 
Rajasthan 
S P Medical 
College, 
Bikaner TCCC 45 27  9.877   27 
29 
SMS 
Medical 
College, 
Jaipur SCI 119.25 71. 55 16.9819    61.7896 
30 
Jhalawar 
Medical 
College & 
Hospital, 
Jhalawar TCCC 43.9 26.34     19.755 
31 Tamil Nadu 
Cancer 
Institute 
(RCC), 
Adyar, 
Chennai SCI 120 72 4.62    72 
32 Telangana 
MNJ 
Institute of 
Oncology 
& RCC, 
Hyderabad SCI 112.7 67.62 
22.35
15   
16.
905
1 67.62 
33 Tripura 
Cancer 
Hospital 
(RCC), 
Agartala SCI 81.5 73.35 18.35    73.35 
34 Sikkim Multispecial TCCC 42.99 38.691 4.371    38.691 
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

ty Hospital 
at 
Sochygang 
(Sichey), 
near 
Gangtok, 
Sikkim 
35 Uttarakhand 
Governmen
t Medical 
College, 
Haldwani SCI 103.6565 
93.29
085     69.967 
36 Uttar 
Pradesh 
Sanjay 
Gandhi 
Postgradua
te Institute 
of Medical 
Sciences, 
Lucknow TCCC 45 27 7.24 5 3.5157 3.2343  25.425 
37 
West 
Bengal 
Governmen
t Medical 
College, 
Burdwan TCCC 39.54 23.724     22.24 
38 
Murshidaba
d Medical 
College & 
Hospital, 
Berhampor
e, 
Murshidaba
d TCCC 32.15 19.29     10.9843 
39 
Sagore 
Dutta 
Memorial 
Medical 
College and 
Hospital, 
Kolkata TCCC 45 27   6.75  27 
 Total (TCCC/SCI) 2907.8575 1985.
58745 
136.8
821 
108.991
5 
66.41
19 
21.2
016 
1736.709
2 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवड़ा जी, क्वेÌचन पूछने वाले सदÎय  नहीं हȅ, 
इसिलए first supplementary question goes to you.  
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
73

Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवड़ा : सर, क्वेÌचन से ज्यादा I have a suggestion to the hon. Minister, 
since the question is linked to cancer.  Sir, sugar is the new tobacco, sugar is a silent 
killer, sugar is causing obesity, cancer, esp ecially in young children.  Many parents 
around the country are being  forced to buy products with high sugar under the garb of it 
being healthy.   There was a controversy recently with Bournvita and world over, 
Governments and authorities and the regulators are trying to take this problem head on.   
My very limited suggestion to the very knowled gable Minister would be that Singapore is 
one of the few countries which seems to have got this right.  They have a very simple 
nutritional code on every product.  They ma rk a product in large letters from A to D, A 
being the healthiest for the parent, D being the unhealthiest.   My simple request would 
be if the Minister could kindly ask  the FSSAI, which is the regulator in this area, to kindly 
look at global models to implement the same  in India, so that we could prevent  an 
obesity and cancer epidemic in young children.  Thank you.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : यह आपका सुझाव है। माननीय मंतर्ी जी, Ãलीज़।  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: The hon. Member has given a suggestion.   I have taken 
the suggestion. 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR:  Sir, the Proton Treatment for Cancer is now becoming a 
costly one. What measures are taken by the Union Government to facilitate Proton 
Treatment for cancer to common people?  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : सर, समय कम है।  मȅ िसफर् यह बताना चाहता हूं िक क ȅसर क े टर्ीटमȂट क े िलए 
आयुÍमान आरोग्य योजना क े तहत …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Time is over, hon. Minister.  Now, before lunch, a statement 
by Minister correcting answer to Question. Shri Sarbananda Sonowal.  
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are available 
as Part – I to this Debate, published electron ically on the Rajya Sabha website under the 
link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER CORRECTING ANSWER TO QUESTION 
 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL(MINISTER OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS): 
Sir, I lay a Statement (in English and Hindi) correcting the answer given to 
Supplementary Questions raised in respect of Starred Question No. 155 given in the Rajya 
Sabha on the 6th  August, 2024 regarding ‘Bridge construction over the river Brahmaputra 
National Waterways-2’. 
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

215395/2024/Q Branch
File No. LAFEAS-QB17/3/2024-Q Branch-RSS (Computer No. 39038)
Generated from eOffice by Suneet Kumar, AEO(STR)-Q, AEO(Q), RSS on 02/04/2026 11:30 am
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
75
Statement

215395/2024/Q Branch
File No. LAFEAS-QB17/3/2024-Q Branch-RSS (Computer No. 39038)
Generated from eOffice by Suneet Kumar, AEO(STR)-Q, AEO(Q), RSS on 02/04/2026 11:30 am
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]
िववरण

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the House stands adjourned to meet at 
2.00 p.m. to
day. ...(Interruptions)...  
The House then adjourned for lunch at one minute past one of the clock. 
The House re-assembled after lunc
h at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
GOVERNMENT BILLS 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Amendment Bill, 2024; Shri Ha rdeep Singh Puri to move a Motion for 
consideration of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024. 
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024 
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI):   Sir, I move: 
“That the Bill further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1948, be taken into consideration.” 
Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to do some context-setting for the proposed 
Amendment Bill which is being placed for co nsideration before this august House 
today.  As the world’s fastest growing larg e economy, India is on its journey from a 
current GDP of four trillion dollars, hopefully , in the foreseeable future, to become a 
seven,  eight or ten trillion dollars GDP, on to Viksit Bharat by 2047.  This is a sankalp,  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
77

a resolve, espoused by the hon. Prime Minister.  Sir, the entire nation, our people 
and the Government are steadfastly committed to ensuring the successful fulfilment of 
this resolve.  For the growth of any economy , it becomes clear that energy is not only 
a vital component but is actua lly the lifeline of the economy .  Invariably, when energy 
consumption levels are seen to be rising, it is a sure sign of growing economic activity 
and GDP growth.  In fact, if you look around the world today and you see some of the 
large economies, particularly one which is a 20 trillion dollar economy and see what is 
happening inside there, you can get a reason ably good idea, looking at the levels of 
energy consumption.   
Sir, for any democratically elected Gove rnment, especially ones which have a 
large population like ours, it becomes essentia l to ensure that the three challenges of 
availability, affordability and sustainability are met.  I can say before this House with a 
reasonable degree of satisfaction that in the last ten years, -- though even earlier, but 
certainly in the last ten years -- all three have been ensured, more so with a greater 
degree of success.  And, in the midst of gl obal uncertainty and volatility, when there 
was an economic lockdown in the world, the price of a barrel of crude had come 
down to about 19 dollars and 56 cents.  And yet, when economic activity resumed, 
the 19 dollars shot up to over a 128 dollars.  In India, for the last three years, if we use 
that as a reference period, I can say with confidence that we are perhaps the only 
country in the world where prices of energy -- I talk about at the retail point of petrol 
and diesel -- have actually come down, wh ere in the neighbourhood they have not 
only shot up but there are very serious issues  of non-availability.  Sir, we currently 
produce about 30 million metric  tonnes of crude oil and 36. 5 billion cubic metres of 
natural gas annually.  As against this production, we consume 235 million metric 
tonnes of petroleum products and 68 billion cu bic metres of natural gas.  There is 
clearly a very large gap between  what we produce and what  we consume.  On this, 
we could have an entire day’s discussion, but I will stick to some of the more evident 
features. 
Sir, when I had the privilege of joining this Ministry three years ago, our daily 
consumption of crude in terms of millions of barrels was 5 millio n barrels a day. In 
three years, this has gone up to 5.4 m illion barrels a day and I can say with a 
reasonable degree of confiden ce that in another year or so, this 5.4 million barrels, if 
our growth rates remain in the vicinity of  6.5 per cent or so, will go up to 6 million 
barrels and so on and so forth.  It is vital,  therefore, for us to increase exploration and 
production of oil and gas, both onshore an d offshore, and, for achieving this, it is 
necessary for us to address policies and laws which inhibit our efforts. We have taken 
a number of steps in this direction.  But,  before I enumerate some of them, I would 
78
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

like to submit to this august House that  exploration and production, by its very 
definition, requires heavy investment and in volves invariably a long gestation period. 
In other words, if one lets the eye off the ball now, the results will be seen five or ten 
years from now. If I could be a little more  explicit, between 2006 and 2014, virtually 
nothing was done on the exploration and production front.  Therefore, we had to bear 
the brunt because the gestation fallout of  non-action between 2006 and 2014 had to 
be borne by this Government. Why? It is  because there were some obvious things. 
There were some projects which were gold-pl ated.  There were some projects where 
there were a large number of other things , and when you audited those projects, 
people got scared. Invariably, digging a well offshore requires something in the vicinity 
of US$ 100 million and, therefore, you have to persevere.  Some of the biggest finds 
in the world, in terms of energy, have b een after big companies, the oil majors, who 
have, probably, dug 16 wells and had no results and, in the 17th well, suddenly they 
have. So, it requires investment and long ge station periods. In 2016, in order to avoid 
the mistakes of the past – I am not blaming anyone – we went from production-
sharing regimes to revenue-sharing regimes,  which are much simpler to implement.  
If you do a production-sharing regime, some body may turn around and say, ‘Well! I 
didn't spend the US$ 100 which you though t I spent, I spent actually US$ 500.’ Let 
us leave it at that; if you strike oil, let us share the revenue on that. ”  Then, the 
Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licencing Policy  (HELP) was introduced by us in 2016, 
under which 2.5 lakh square kilometres or 144 blocks have been awarded. Of these, 
131 blocks are under active exploration. Cu mulatively, these entailed an investment of 
US$ 3.37 billion.   
Then, I come to the Open Acreage Licencing Program (OALP) from Round I to 
VIII, where discoveries have been made. For a long period, our exploration and 
production efforts were undermined by the fact that out of the total sedimentary basin 
of 3.5 million square kilometres, one million square kilometres was regarded as a No-
go area. No-go area means, for some reason  or the other, due to concerns of the 
Navy, Coast Guard, DRDO, you couldn't explore there.  I am very happy to inform the 
House, through you, that in the OALP IX Round, that is the Open Acreage Licencing 
Program in Round IX, 38 per cent of bids received have been in this one million square 
kilometre of No-go area. It is my expectat ion that after this House passes the Bill and 
is enacted, the OALP Round X, which will be  held, will benefit from the changes that 
we are seeking to bring through this Amendm ent. We have also made almost all the 
geological data available on the National Data Repository, which will start functioning, 
I am told, by March or April next year.  These measures by the Government have 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
79

borne fruit in increasing focus towards exploration, production and in attracting large-
scale investment. 
Sir, whilst we are making these changes in the oil an d gas sector and reforms 
to make these fit for purpose with the current needs and mark et conditions, we 
carried out large-scale stakeholder consulta tions.  By stakeholder consultations, I 
mean we consulted not only the oil majors in the world but other stakeholders also.  
There are only about five oil majors in the world - Exxon, BP, Chevron, Total, ENI, 
etc.  We consulted them on why they had ceased looking at India as an investment 
destination.  And invariably, almost all of them, including the other stakeholders, told 
us that our legal framework required not just tweaking, but in some cases, major 
changes.  So, we carried ou t a detailed assessment of the present legal framework, 
and based on in-house brainstorming and stakeholder discussion, we felt there was a 
need to align the existing framework with th e requirements of the current situation in 
the world.  And in this regard, I want to point out that the original legislation, which we 
had, was a comprehensive legislation going b ack to the year of th e Lord, 1948.  This 
covered not only petroleum and gas sector , but also sectors like mining, minerals, 
metals and the entire range.  But I will come  to that in a minute.   So, the feeling was 
that we needed to tweak the existing  framework with the requirements of 
contemporary times, including the emergence of new fuels like shale gas, shale oil, 
coal bed methane, natural gas, gas hydrates, the emergence of new technologies like 
carbon capture utilisation and sequestratio n, green hydrogen an d new frameworks 
such as sharing of resour ces and infrastructure between different operators to 
improve the viability of oil blocks.   And,  new concepts, like unitisation, will ensure 
that even when the natura l resources flow between di fferent contiguous blocks, 
disputes between operators can be reso lved amicably. The provisions of the 
amended Act will ensure that the operators will have a stable tenure in terms of tenure 
and terms of conditions for the lease. Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanisms 
envisaged in the law will ensure that disputes can be resolved in a timely, fair and 
cost-effective manner. 
 This Bill seeks to eliminate punishme nts in the form of imprisonment and 
provide for enhanced penalties to ensure co mpliance.  The Bill also seeks to provide 
for an expeditious mechanism for levy of pe nalties as well as for handling of appeals 
arising therefrom.  All above provisions, that I have mentioned, intend to substantially 
improve the Ease of Doing Business and ma ke India an attractive destination for 
enhanced production of oil and gas to monetize our vast reserves. 
Sir, I briefly hinted a minute ago that the parent Act, the Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Act, that we  are seeking to amend through this Bill, 
80
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

was enacted as far back as 1948.  This wa s rechristened the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1948, when a separate law for the mines and minerals sector was 
enacted by Parliament in 1957.  This 1948 Act continued to carry the weight of the 
legacy of terminologies used in the mini ng industry resulting in difficulties in 
implementation and delay in carrying on petroleum operations. 
It was also felt that we needed a mo re attractive and collaborative approach 
between the Government and the contractors and move away from regulatory control 
which focused excessively on collecting royalt ies.  Towards this end, we had multiple 
interactions and sought inputs from different  stakeholders operating in the oil and gas 
sector, both in India and in foreign jurisdictions.  We also looked at a few international 
frameworks in other countries from where we could glean best practices for suitable 
adoption in this effort to update our legislation and aligning it with our future needs. 
This Amendment Bill before this August Ho use for consideration will, therefore, not 
only give a fillip for further investments in the oil and gas sector but also promote the 
Ease of Doing Business.  In this effort, we are guided by the well-accepted principles 
and the need for ensuring stability, predictability and continuity in our policies and 
laws.  Vide this Amendment Bill, we not on ly intend to do away with the needless 
mention and regulation of mining activities, which is now dealt with by a separate law, 
as it already has a sector-specific law, that is, the Mines and Minerals Act of 1957, but 
also to provide a simple, transparent and stable regime for petroleum leases and 
petroleum production activitie s. We are overhauling the prevalent multiple licences 
and lease document paradigm in favour of a single document framework specifying 
different contours of petroleum mining activ ities. In order to remove uncertainty, we 
propose to substitute an acrimonious mode  of dispute resolution with a fast and 
predictable adjudication mechanism and arbi tration for leases and authorisations 
granted by the Government.  Further, Sir,  to provide a helping hand to small 
producers, we intend to share infrastructure and other mechanisms providing stability 
to the ecosystem. 
Sir, I might add here that our experi ence has shown that unless there is a 
drastic simplification in the approach to th is resource and unless we are able to do 
away with multiple crossroads resulting in litigation into misinterpretation or different 
kinds of interpretation, the entire sector ge ts bogged down as indeed it did for a 10-
year period because of a variety of reasons.  As I said, individuals may not be able to 
blame but if you have policies or laws which are capable of being differently 
interpreted, those who wish to manipula te the system or misuse some of the 
provisions will happily do so.  Therefore, it  is intended to provide a clean break from 
that, that we are bringing in this amendmen t and this new Bill.  We are on course to 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
81

reduce our committed greenhouse gas emissi ons and to become Net Zero by 2070, 
as the hon. Prime Minister had resolved. 
The Amendments have also been proposed keeping th at commitment in mind.  
Efforts towards promotion of new and green technologies like green hydrogen, 
carbon capture and utilisation will facilitate the development of comprehensive energy 
projects, which is the need of the hour.  After these Amendments to the Oilfields 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 come into force, we are confident of 
enhanced participation by oil and gas entiti es in future bid rounds. And, even in 
anticipation of this legislation, in our ou treach to them, we have said, ‘come and join 
us.  If you have the technical competence and expertise, join us in offshore deep sea 
seismic surveys.  You don't need to make a commitment. We will compensate you for 
your services and if we strike oil or gas, yo u will have the right of first refusal.’  But, 
now, we need legislation to ensure that what the Government has done so far, and, 
what we need to do in future, meets the energy requirements of this important sector, 
which, I believe, contributes some 19-20 per cent to Government revenues.  With this 
objective, we are bringing this Bill in.   
With these words, I would conclude and urge the hon. Members of this august House 
to support and pass this Bill. 
 
The question was proposed.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I now call upon the Members whose names have been 
received for participation in the discussion .  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil.  You have 14 
minutes.  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल (गुजरात) :  उपसभापित महोदय, मंतर्ी जी ने, जैसे िडमांड फॉर गर्ांट पर, 
बजट पर Ģवचन देते हुए कहा जाता है, वैसे पूरे क्षेतर् की बातȂ कही हȅ और एक scope widen 
िकया है।  मȅ The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024 क े ऊपर 
अपने िवचार रखने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  इस िबल का एक इितहास भी मंतर्ी जी ने बताया िक 
originally 'oilfields, minerals and mines' सभी एक साथ regulate होते थे।  धीरे-धीरे उसमȂ 
बदलाव होते-होते आज यह 'oilfields' रह  गया है।  उसमȂ भी जब अमȂडमȂट की बात है, उसके  
ऊपर मȅ अपने िवचार साझा
 करता हूँ।  जैसा िक मंतर्ी जी कह रहे थे, िबÊकु ल सही बात है िक 
आज हमȂ oilfield मȂ आत्मिनभर्र होने की जरूरत  है।  हम िजतना locally possibility explore 
करके  production ज्यादा लȂगे, हमारे िलए अच्छा है, पर आज दुख की बात यह है िक हमȂ जो 
जरूरत
 है, उसमȂ हमȂ बहुत ही कम domestic production िमलता है।  मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक जैसे 
पहले क ु छ होता नहीं था, अब Îविर्णम काल मȂ क ु छ हो गया। मȅ याद िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक मुÇबई 
हाई, नीलम और हीरा क्षेतर् - जो आपका Ģोडक्शन टोटल Ģाकृ ितक गैस िनगम िलिमटेड 
82
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(ओएनजीसी) का है, उसमȂ से िसफर् इन तीन जगहȗ का Ģोडक्शन 59 परस Ȃट है।  मȅ इन तीन ही 
जगहȗ की बात करता हूँ।  ये तीनȗ 1976 और 1984 क े बीच बने थे, िजनको आज भी आप क ंपीट 
नहीं कर सकते हȅ, यह एक वाÎतिवकता है।  तो पहले क ु छ नहीं होता था, अब सब क ु छ होता है - 
वह जो बात हुई, इसका यह जवाब है िक िसफर् इन तीन जगहȗ से जो 59 परसȂट डोमेिÎटक 
Ģोडक्शन िमलता है, वे तीनȗ 1976 और 1984 क
े  बीच बने हुए हȅ, आपके  कायर्काल मȂ नहीं बने हȅ।  
महोदय, मȅ मंतर्ी जी को सुन रहा था।  मुझे लग रहा था िक मंतर्ी जी बताएंगे िक आज क े कानून मȂ 
क्या किमयां हȅ, िजन्हȂ हम दूर कर रहे हȅ, तािक डोमेिÎटक Ģोडक्शन बढ़ जाए।  Ģवचन मȂ कहीं 
वह बात नहीं आई िक what are the provisions in this Bill which will invite more 
participation from around the world िक  चलो, हम िंहदुÎतान मȂ चलȂ, वहाँ कोई नया कानून 
बना है और यहाँ पॉिसिबिलटी को एक्सÃलोर करȂ।  उसके  बजाय क ु छ और हो रहा है।  इसमȂ 
section-wise क्या difficulties आ रही हȅ, उन्हȂ मȅ बताने की कोिशश करूं गा। 
मȅ सबसे पहले तो
 यह गुजािरश करू ँगा िक आप यह जो नया अमȂडमȂट है, इसको क ृपया 
उन पर मत लागू कीिजएगा, जो आपके  existing contractors, licensees, leaseholders हȅ, 
क्यȗिक जब वह कानून था, तब उनके  साथ जो ह
ुआ है, उनको वहीं छोड़ देना चािहए।  आपके  
अमȂडमȂट एक्ट का जो Ģपोज्ड सेक्शन 3(c) है, मȅ उसके  ऊपर बात करना चाहता हूँ।  Proposed 
section 3(c) of the Amendment Act inter alia excludes helium from the definition of 
mineral oils and the sa
me should be, this is my submission, included to enable oil and 
gas production, to explore and extract helium from oil and gas shale blocks.   
इसका जो दूसरा सेक्शन है, Section 5(2)(e&f), इसमȂ आप क्या कर रहे हȅ? अगर  
आप इस सेक्शन को अमȂड नहीं करते, तो उससे क्या होगा?  This section will provide very 
wide discretionary rule-making powers to the Central Government with respect to 
petroleum lease.  The Government should continue with the existing arbitration 
provision as per model production sharing contracts, else the international oil and gas 
companies may see this as a risk where the Government has disproportionate power 
to control or interfere with the contractual disputes.  सर, आज क्या िÎथित है - एक
 
contract हुआ है, कोई oil and gas company explore कर रही है and some dispute arises. 
आज यह Ģोिवजन है िक आप आिर्बटर्ेटर को रखो और जो आिर्बटर्ेटर है, वह तय करेगा।  सरकार 
क्या करना चाहती है - आिर्बटर्ेटर का नहीं, यह हमारा अिधकार है।  इससे क्या impact होगा?  
कोई भी आपके  यहाँ – क्यȗिक यह तो एक ऐसा फ ैक्टर है िक यह गैÇबिंलग जैसा है।  आप कहीं 
क ु आँ बना रहे हȅ, उसमȂ दाम लगा रहे हȅ।  अगर आपकी तकदीर अच्छी है और वहाँ अच्छा oil and 
gas िमल गया, तो आप मालामाल हो गए, लेिकन आपने पैसा डाला और आपको वहाँ क ु छ नहीं 
िमला, उसमȂ ऐसा भी  होता है, परन्तु यह क्षेतर् ऐसा भी है। 
सर, जो भी पिÅलक स
ेक्टर मȂ है, यह सरकार उसको खत्म कर रही है, यह कहते हुए िक 
हमारा काम Ëयापार करना नहीं है।  परन्तु saf
e corruption क े िलए, गवनर्मȂट क े िलए सबसे बड़ा, 
I will demonstrate िक इसमȂ िकस तरह से करÃशन का मामला चलता है।  I will demonstrate. 
इसमȂ आप हाथ डालते हȅ। Why don’t you make a law?  Wh y don’t you invite players who 
are in this field?  यह तो दिरया क े बीच मȂ क ु आँ करना ह
ै, जो करना है, करो, Ãलैटफॉमर् उठा 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
83

िलया, िफर मȅ कौन, तू कौन।  इसके  िलए इस कानून मȂ जो बदलाव की जरूरत थी, अगर मंतर्ी जी 
वह लेकर आते, तो उसे समथर्न करते हुए मुझे खुशी होती।  इसिलए मेरी यह माँग है िक 
आिर्बटर्ेटर का जो Ģोिवजन है, काइंडली उसे एज इट इज़ रिखए।   
Clause 6 of the Amendment Bill provides  power to make ru les in respect of 
mineral oils development.  Sub-clause (iv )(ga) of Clause 6( C)says,“the collection, 
aggregation, dissemination, use or sharing of the data and samples related to
 mineral 
oils with the Central Government or an y other party nominated by the Central 
Government..”  क्यȗ?  अगर  कोई Ãलेयर इस कॉिÇपटेिटव माकȃ ट मȂ अपना पैसा लगा करके  
काम कर रहा है, तो क्या उसके  िलए आप यह िडसाइड करȂगे िक उसे िकसके  साथ डेटा शेयर 
करना है?  हम तो चाहते हȅ िक हमारी जमीन मȂ हमारा अिधकार का िमनरÊस हमारे लोगȗ क े िलए 
- आप इस तरह से संशोिधत करȂ और उसको लाएँ।  प
ुरानी गवनर्मȂट का जो शेयिंरग फॉमूर्ला है, 
उससे मȅ एगर्ी करता हूँ।  आप उसके  साथ इस तरह से किरए िक ऑयल और गैस मेरी भूिम से 
िमलता है, इसिलए मेरा इतना शेयर होगा, यह ठीक है।  अगर आप इसको इसी तरह से रखȂगे, 
there should be an exception that oil and gas companies will not be required to part 
with commercially sensitive data acquired by them as part of ongoing petroleum 
operations for a period
 of ten years from the date such data was first acquired by 
them.10 साल क े िलए उनके  पास रहने दीिजए।  अगर ऐसा होगा, तो वह िरÎक लेकर आगे काम 
करेगा। I have a problem with Clause 6( C)(iv)(ga) which I have just explained.  
Clauses 9A and 9B of the Amendment Bill provide for designating an adjudicating 
authority for conducting inquiry and imposing penalty under the provisions of the law.  
Clause 9A provides that no officer be low the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India shall be designat ed as an adjudicating authority.  िफर अपील 
िटर्Åयूनल मȂ जाएगा।  आप इससे क्या करना चाहते हȅ?  क्या हमारा ज्वाइंट सेकर् ेटरी dispute को 
redress करेगा?  If there is any dispute between the Government and the person who 
is exploring?  इसिलए अभी जो जरूरी  है, उसके  िहसाब से कानून बना है िक इंिडपȂडȂट कोई न 
कोई आिर्बटर्ेटर दोनȗ क े बीच म
Ȃ बैठकर काम करेगा।  आप इसको क्यȗ खत्म करना चाहते हȅ?  यह 
मेरी समझ से बाहर है।  मंतर्ी जी ने अपनी बातȗ मȂ बार-बार यह कहा िक हमारी िंचता है िक ज्यादा 
ऑयल एंड गैस िमले।  मेरे पास क ंटर्ोलर एंड ऑिडटर जनरल का 2021 का यह िरपोटर् है।  आज 
सǄा मȂ बैठी हुई पाटीर् जब अपोिजशन मȂ थी, तब तो यह कहती
 थी िक क ै ग मȂ आ गया, माने 
भगवान ने कह िदया।  सीएजी की िरपोटर् ह
ै, माने यह हो ही गया।  अब यह सीएजी कहता है - जो 
आपके  पास existing well है, जहां से आपको ऑयल िमल गया है, यह आपकी खुशिकÎमती है 
िक आप वहां से ऑयल और गैस िनकाल रहे हȅ, उन
 क ु ओं की हेÊथ अच्छी रहनी चािहए।  उसके  
िलए एक्सपट्सर् कहते हȅ िक आपको इसमȂ water inject करना होता है with certain chemicals.  
िजससे क ु एँ की हेÊथ अच्छी रहेगी और आपको वषș-वषș तक ऑयल और गैस िमलता रहेगा।  वषर् 
2015 से माचर्, 2019 तक, यानी आपके  कायर्काल मȂ सीएजी िलखते हȅ िक मुंबई हाई मȂ क ेवल 
54.43 Ģितशत, हीरे मȂ 78.8 Ģितशत, नीलम मȂ क ेवल 42 Ģितशत, जो उनकी एक्सपटर् किमटी ने 
तय िकया है िक जो वाटर इंजेक्ट करना है, जो क ेिमकल इंजेक्ट करना है, वह अगर आप 42 
84
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

परसȂट या 52 परस Ȃट करोगे तो उसका नुकसान क्या हुआ, सीएजी ने इसमȂ इसको भी िलखा है।  
इसमȂ िलखा है िक ओएनजीसी क े िलए इस गलती की वजह से एक ही क्वाटर्र क े अंदर 7,802.50 
करोड़ का नुकसान हुआ।  सर, गवनर्मȂट को टैक्स का 3,474.29 करोड़ का नुकसान हुआ।  If you 
are so concerned, अगर आप डोमेिÎटक क े िलए बहुत िंचितत हो, तो आपको सबसे पहले यह 
िंचता करनी चािहए।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  जिरए मंतर्ी जी से यह भी कहना चाहता हूं िक 
मȅने ऐसे ही नहीं कहा िक यह safe corruption का जिरया है, बिÊक मेरे पास एग्जांपल है और वह 
भी सीएजी की िरपोटर् है। सर, गुजरात Îटेट पेटर्ोिलयम कॉरपोरेशन ( जीएसपीसी) को 
ओएनजीसी ने जो Åलॉक्स िदए, मȅ उन्हीं की बात करता हूं, जो आज सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट क े पास हȅ।  
सर, इस िरपोटर् मȂ िलखा है िक गुजरात गवनर्मȂट ने क ेजी बेिसन मȂ 63 Åलॉक्स िलए, 19,000 
करोड़ रुपय े डाले और वेल वहां बनाया, जहां एक्सपटर् ने नहीं कहा, पर वहां rig वालȗ को 
convenient था िक deep sea मȂ नहीं, मȅ इधर कर लूं, इधर करंट ज्यादा है और वहां नहीं है।  
सर, उसी वƪ क े चीफ िमिनÎटर ने कहा था -- मȅ उस िदन being a Gujarati बह ुत खुश था।  
भले ही िकसी पाटीर् की सरकार हो, कोई बात नहीं, मेरे गुजरात क े िलए अच्छी बात हुई।  उस वƪ 
चीफ िमिनÎटर ने अनाउंस िकया िक भाइयो और बहनो, मुझे क ेजी बेिसन मȂ 20 टीसीएफ ऑयल 
और गैस िमल गया है। ...(समय की घंटी)... सर, अभी मेरा एक िमनट का टाइम बचा है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आपका टाइम खत्म हो गया है।  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल :  सर, मȅ क ेवल एक Ãवाइंट पूरा कर लूँ।  तब उन्हȗने कहा था िक अब मेरा 
गुजराती कॉक खोलेगा तो उससे पानी नहीं, पेटर्ोल और डीजल आएगा और मेरा कोई गुजराती 
अब क ै न मȂ पानी लेकर नहीं जाएगा, दूध लेकर नहीं जाएगा, बिÊक पेटर्ोल लेकर िनकलेगा। तब 
क ु छ ही िदनȗ बाद, DG (Hydrocarbon), who is an authority, उनकी एक Ģेस िरलीज आई, 
िजसमȂ उसने कहा िक वहां पर एक बूंद भी कमिर्शयली वायबल ऑयल और गैस नहीं िमली है। 
सर, मेरा दावा है िक यह पॉिलिटकल नहीं है, बिÊक मेरे हाथ मȂ सीएजी की िरपोटर् है, िजसमȂ वे 
कहते हȅ िक आपने वहां पर GSPC का 19,000 करोड़ रुपय े गलत तरीके  से पानी मȂ डाल िदया, 
दिरया मȂ डाल िदया। ...(समय की घंटी)... बाहर जाकर भी िवदेशȗ मȂ िडर्ल िकया  और 3,000 
करोड़ रुपय े यूएस डॉलर मȂ खचर् कर उसे जीरो करके  आ गए।  आप क्या बात करते हो!  क्या 
पॉिलिटकल!  थȅक यू। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय Ǜी चुन्नीलाल गरािसया जी, आपके  10 िमनट हȅ।  
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया (राजÎथान) : माननीय उपसभापित जी,  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से आज तेल 
क्षेतर् िवधेयक क े संबंध मȂ हो रही इस पिरचचार् मȂ क ु छ अपने िवचार सदन मȂ रखूंगा।  हमारे देश क े 
Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी जी ने देश क े तेल क्षेतर् मȂ क्वांिटटी और क्वािलटी मȂ जो 
Ģगित की है, उसको िंबदुवार बताते हुए यह िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक वाÎतव मȂ देश मȂ 
आवÌयकता और पूिर्त का जो एक बहुत बड़ा गैप था, जो बहुत बड़ा अंतर था, उसको पाटने की 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
85

भरसक कोिशश की गई है। हमारे देश क े नागिरकȗ को, चाहे गैस क े क्षेतर् मȂ हो, चाहे पेटर्ोिलयम क े 
क्षेतर् मȂ हो - आयात मȂ िकस तरह से हम कमी लाते हुए देश मȂ ही देश क े Ģोडक्ट को क ै से सरÃलस 
करȂ, िजससे िक हम िवदेशी मुदर्ा का बचाव कर सकȂ और आपूिर्त भी ठीक ठंग से कर सकȂ । पहले 
मांग और खपत मȂ काफी अंतर था, उसको क ै से पूरा कर सकȂ, उसे भी आज मȅ इस पिरचचार् मȂ 
लाना चाहूंगा।  
आने वाले समय मȂ भारत की तेज़ी से बढ़ती आिर्थक समृिǉ क े कारण ऊजार् की जो मांग 
बढ़ रही है और आने वाले समय मȂ यह मांग दोगुनी हो कर लगभग 1,123 िमिलयन टन तेल 
समतुÊय हो जाएगी। भारत मȂ Îवतंतर्ता क े बाद मातर् 0.26 एमएमटी से बढ़कर लगभग 30 
एमएमटी हो गया है और यिद हम Ģितशत क े िहसाब से इसकी तुलना करȂ तो यह 10 हज़ार  
Ģितशत से भी अिधक की वृिǉ Ģदिर्शत करता ह
ै। भारत लगभग 37 BCM Ģाकृ ितक गैस का 
उत्पादन भी करता है। भारत मȂ पेटर्ोिलयम उत्पादȗ की खपत लगभग 230 एमएमटी Ģितवषर् होती 
है, िजसके  और बढ़ने क े अनुमान हȅ।  
कच्चा तेल और Ģाकृ ितक गैस की मांग और घरेलू उत्पाद क े बीच का अंतर आयात क े 
माध्यम से पूरा िकया जाता था। वतर्मान मȂ भारत की आयात िनभर्रता 85 परसȂट स
े अिधक है। इस 
Ģयोजन क े िलए सरकार ने कच्चे तेल और Ģाकृ ितक गैस क े उत्पादन को बढ़ाने तथा ईंधन की 
खरीद को िÎथरता लÑय क े अनुरूप  बनाने क े िलए ईंधन क े ǣोतȗ मȂ िविवध
ता लाने क े िलए कदम 
उठाए हȅ।  
सरकार ने जैव ईंधन क े माध्यम से ऊजार् की उपलÅधता बढ़ाने की ओर कदम उठाए हȅ, 
िजसमȂ इस िदशा मȂ एथेनॉल की खरीद - जो 2014 मȂ मातर् 38 करोड़ लीटर थी, वह अब बढ़कर 
2024 मȂ 720 करोड़ लीटर हो गई है। इससे हमको जो लाभ हुआ है, उसमȂ लगभग 1 लाख करोड़ 
रुपय े की िवदेशी मुदर्ा को बचाया है और साथ ही साथ 180 लाख मीिटर्क टन कच्चे तेल क े आयात 
का ĢितÎथापन भी ह
ुआ है। यानी हमको मुदर्ा मȂ भी फायदा हुआ है और आयात मȂ भी हमने 
क्वांिटटी कम की है। आपूिर्त क े ऊपर Ģभाव नहीं पड़ा है, िजस ढंग से देश मȂ आवÌयकता है, 
उसको प
ूरा करते हुए हमने िवदेशी मुदर्ा भी बचाई है और आयात भी कम िकया है। यह बहुत बड़ी 
उपलिÅध हमारी सरकार की रही ह
ै और देश का नेतृत्व करने वाले Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी की रही 
है। यह हमारा एक बहुत बड़ा उपलिÅध का कारण बनता है।  
गैस क े क्षेतर् मȂ बायोगैस का एक नया आयाम िदया ह
ै और बायोगैस मȂ लगभग Ģितवषर् 15 
एमएमटी की वृिǉ होने की संभावना लगाई है िक इससे गैस क े पिरवहन मȂ कमी आएगी और 
Îथानीय Îतर पर उपभोƪाओं को गैस िमल पाएगी। यह भी इस सेक्टर मȂ अपने आप मȂ एक नई 
उपलिÅध ह
ुई है। सरकार की िज़Çमेदारी क े साथ-साथ गैस की खोज और राज्य मȂ ऊजार् सुरक्षा मȂ 
सुधार हो, देश की ऊजार् आवÌयकता को पूरा करने क े िलए दूसरे देशȗ पर भारत की िनभर्रता कम 
हो, इसके  िलए ऊजार् आत्मिनभर्रता को हािसल िकया गया है। मान्यवर, तेलक्षेतर् िविनयम िवकास 
िवधेयक, जो आज यहां सदन मȂ मंतर्ी जी क
े  माध्यम से लाया गया है, उसमȂ कई सुधार की भी 
आवÌयकता है।  सर, सुधार से मतलब यह है िक हमारे रूरल  क्षेतर् मȂ, गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ, तेल और 
गैस मȂ िकस ढंग से छोटी-छोटी Ģशासिनक ËयवÎथाओं क े आधार पर हम गरीब और मध्यम क्लास 
क े लोगȗ तक, जो अभी शहरी और गर्ामीण क े बीच मȂ अंतर है, उसको क ै से पाट सकते हȅ, मȅ 
उसके  बारे मȂ हमारे क ेन्दर्ीय मंतर्ी जी से िवशेष रूप  से आगर्ह कर रहा हूं।  गैस क े क्षेतर् मȂ हमारा एक 
86
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

िडिÎटर्Åयूटर होता है।  उन िडिÎटर्Åयूटरȗ को समय-समय क्या-क्या परेशािनयां आती हȅ, उसके  
बारे मȂ मंतर्ालय अपना सैल बनाता है और समय-समय पर इनके  साथ चचार् करके  इनकी 
समÎयाओं को सुनता है।  गैस एक ऐसा Ģोडक्ट है, िजसको िडिÎटर्Åयूटर घर पर पहुंचाता है। जब 
वह उसको घर पर पहुंचाता है, तो उसमȂ समÎया आती है।  हम मंतर्ालय क े माध्यम से क ै से उसको 
सहयोग कर सकते हȅ, उसको मुझे Ëयावहािरक रूप  से भी फीÊड मȂ देखने को िमला है और उससे 
गर्ाहक और िडिÎटर्Åयूटर क े बीच मȂ टर्ांसपोटȃशन और दूरी को लेकर जो परेशािनयां आती हȅ, 
उसको हम क ै से पाट सकते हȅ, उस पर भी मंतर्ालय िंचता करेगा। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : गरािसया जी, िनयम क े अनुसार आपको इस िवधेयक पर ही बोलना है। 
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया : सर, मेरा िनवेदन यह था िक मेरे क ु छ अपने भाव से …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़, सीट पर ब
ैठकर न बोलȂ।   
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया : उपसभापित जी, मȅ यह िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक वाÎतव मȂ िविनमयन 
िवधेयक क े माध्यम से कई वैकिÊपक िववादȗ क े समाधान क े िलए आज म
ंतर्ी जी ने सदन मȂ हमारे 
सामने िवधेयक क े रूप  मȂ इसको रखा है, तो मȅ आपके  माध्यम से और देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी 
क े माध्यम से जो एक ऐितहािसक पिरवतर्न इस सैक्टर मȂ आया है, उसमȂ हम क ै से आगे बढ़Ȃ, 
उसके  बारे मȂ मंतर्ी जी से िनवेदन करूं गा। मंतर्ी जी ने िवधेयक मȂ जो िवषय रखे हȅ, वे बहुत अच्छे 
रखे हȅ, यही मेरा कहना है।  जय भारत!  धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : सुǛी दोला सेन।  आपके  पास छह िमनट का समय है, please.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN (West Bengal): Thank you Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, and th
anks to 
my party, All India Trinamool Congress, for giving me a chance to speak on this Bill.  I 
hope I and all other hon. Members will be al lowed to speak, and carry out our duty in 
scrutinizing this Bill.  In the 17 th Lok Sabha, a total of 221 Bills were passed, of which 
one-third were passed with less than  a 60-minute discussion!  In the 15 th Lok Sabha, 
seven out of 10 Bills were sent to Committees for scrutiny!  In the 17th Lok Sabha, only 
two out of 10 Bills were sent for scrutiny!  The 18 th Lok Sabha is an opportunity for the 
Union Government to start afresh.  Let us  not allow it to be a repeat of the 17 th Lok 
Sabha.  We have to be democratic.   
Sir, the Government’s intent to update this Act as per today’s market is good. 
Many of the speakers today will talk in dept h about the Bill. I want to highlight some 
macro issues. India continues to import more than 85 per cent of its crude oil needs 
and 50 per cent of its natural gas needs. This dependency is projected to only rise as 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
87

domestic production continues to fall. Ou r crude oil imports from Russia in June, 
2024 surpassed that of June, 2023.                                                                                In  
August, 2024, net imports for oil and gas escalated to 11.4 billion dollars from 9 
billion dollars. This is no surprise considering PSUs like ONGC and OIL reported lower 
outputs. Domestic production of indigenous crude oil failed by 3 per cent while 
imports increased by 6.4 per cent. The refi ning sector also showed a 1.9 per cent 
decrease in total crude oil processed in August, 2024. Our petroleum reserves can 
provide cover for only 9.5 days of the nati onal demand. If a crisis were to strike 
tomorrow, we would have no resources, but only long pending bills. So unfortunate!  
Another thing that I want to mention to protest is that the profitable public 
sector undertakings like Indian Oil, Bharat Petroleum are in the list of disinvestment of 
the Union Government’s Viksit Bharat Scheme. यह होना नहीं चािहए।  
Earlier this year, the Government saved 25 billion dollars by importing Russian 
crude oil at discounted prices. This was welcomed as a great move that would finally 
give us some relief from rising prices domest ically. Sir, not a single penny of this was 
used to benefit the people. Domestic prices continue to remain high day after day.  
Instead, the oil was sold to private refineries in Europe translating to profit margins for 
a select few private entities. We do not un derstand as to who the Union Government 
is working for. In November, 2024, the pri ce of international crude oil was 73 dollars 
per barrel, at the same time, the price of pe trol in the domestic market was Rs.95 per 
litre.  Sir, comparing this to 2014, the price of international crude oil was 78 dollars per 
barrel and that of petrol was Rs.64 per litre . If the Government could regulate prices 
then, why would not they now? We are obse rving that the international crude prices 
are down and down 2014 onwards, but we do not know why the Union Government 
of India is making the citizens pay higher prices for petrol domestically and, increasing 
it day by day? It is astonishing. 
 In the last five years, only five per cent of subsidies and investments have been 
in green energy. India is in no position to  achieve its net zero emissions target by 
2030.  As per projections, achieving this target could be delayed by at least a decade. 
Experts believe that India’s relationship with markets beyond the Middle East have 
weakened leading to volume shrinkage. There is no diversification of supply. If 
geopolitics demands were to change ag ain in the future, India would be very 
vulnerable to rapid fluctuations. Why is th e Government putting us in this position? 
 One more important policy matter that I want to mention is this. The region 
where oil fields are being detected, the densely populated areas’ common people 
must get rehabilitation accordingly along with demurrage and benefits for being 
evicted as per law. In the tr ibal areas, the Forest Right Act must be maintained. We 
88
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

want to see human face on behalf of the Union Government in this respect and the 
Union Government must follow the law of th e land as per the Constitution in this 
regard. Sir, the Government needs to do better. Today, the retail inflation reached a 
14 month high at 6.2 per cent in October. Four out of ten youths are unemployed. … 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the subject.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN: The average cost of making meal s has increased by 52 per cent in 
the last one year while the salaries have grow n around 10 per cent only in the last one 
year. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the Bill.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN:  The salaries have grown around 10 per cent only. I urge upon the 
Union Government to work for the people and with the people. The Union 
Government should be of the people, fo r the people, by the people, and as per 
Constitution, for we, the people of India.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri N.R. Elango. 
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, I rise on behalf of my party to insist that this 
Bill be referred to a select committee and to  have wider deliberatio ns with the States 
before passing.   
Before giving the reasons, I first comp liment the Ministry for giving a clear idea 
of the Bill in the Statement of Objects and Reasons, because in most of the Bills what 
we see today doesn't contain any reason ing in the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons.  Fortunately, in this Bill, it has been given.  The hon. Minister was also 
elaborating on these objects of  the Bill.  Sir, why I reques t this Bill be referred to a 
select committee?  The reas ons are these.  First, the Bill seeks to expand the 
meaning of ‘mineral oil’.  Th is is number one.  The word ‘mine’ is omitted from the 
definition.  The word ‘mining lease’ is replaced with ‘petroleum lease’.  There comes a 
p r o b l e m .    B e f o r e  t h a t ,  i n  C l a u s e  ( d )  o f  Section 3, the scope is expanded to give 
retrospective effect to the lease agreements entered prior to this Amendment.  Then it 
has to be considered the interplay between  this provision and the newly proposed 
Section 13A.  It has to be considered.  And, in Clause 6 of  the Bill, it is proposed to 
amend the marginal heading of Section 6 by substituting the word ‘mineral’ with the 
word ‘mineral oil’.  But the Ministry has fail ed to consider that this had already been 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
89

substituted in Act 67 of 1957, with effect from 1.6.1958.  Already the Act read it as 
mineral oil only.   
Sir, by changing mining lease into petroleum lease, what is it that they are 
going to achieve?  Whether they can get pe trol without any mining operation?  Why 
they want to change mining lease into petrol eum lease?   The reas on is this. This Bill 
was introduced on 5th of August, 2024.  There was Nine Judge Bench judgment of 
the Supreme Court, which was delivered on 25 th of July 2024, while considering 
MMDR Act.  Under the scope of the MMDR Ac t, the rights of the State Governments 
were considered, and eight Judges had elab orately said, ‘What are all the rights of 
the States?’ The hon. Minister, while introd ucing the Bill, was also saying that the 
MMDR Act was earlier there, then Petroleum Act was separated.  Now, ‘mining’ word 
is being replaced only to take away the rights of the States.  The Bill has been 
introduced after this judgme nt.  In that judgment, th e Supreme Court said, while 
quoting Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, “That many entries in the Seventh Schedule may appear 
to overlap because of the language used in the entries. The necessary corollary to the 
scheme of legislative distribution is that  any invasion by Parliament in the field 
assigned to the States and vice ve rsa is a breach of Constitution. ”  That is what you 
are attempting to do. You want to breach th e Constitution because you want to take 
away the interplay between List 1, entry 53 and List 2, entry 23 and 50.  You want to 
take away the rights of the States. Sir, of course, the Indian federalism is defined as 
asymmetric because it tilts towards the Centre producing a strong Central 
Government.  Yet, it has not necessarily re sulted in weak State Governments.  Sir, 
you don't think that passing law will weaken  the State Governments.  The fact that 
under the scheme of our Constitution, great er power is conferred upon the Centre, 
vis-a-vis the State does not mean that the States are mere appendages to the 
Centre. Within the sphere allotted to them , States are supreme.  That has been 
forgotten by the Ministry while enacting this .  By merely replacing the word ‘mining 
lease’, what they want to achieve is th at they want to take away the State 
Government's interest.  Sir, Rule 5 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959, 
stipulates that the license can be given on ly by the State Government with the prior 
approval of the Central Government.  Now, what will happen to that rule if this Act is 
amended. …(Time-bell rings)… Sir, one more minute. I will finish.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  
 
SHRI N. R. ELANGO :  Sir, while enacting this Act, the Parliament has to consider as 
to what effects the petroleum mining is going to have on biodiversity, on agricultural 
90
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

fields because, in most of the places in Tamil Nadu where they want to do these 
operations, the agricultural activities are being affected, the agricultural lands are 
being affected. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
SHRI N. R. ELANGO : Sir, agriculture is most import ant than petrol. Please consider 
that by merely quoting the economy, we ca nnot sacrifice agriculture and biodiversity 
of the country. I request this needs to be placed before a Committee. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The next speaker is Shri  Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy; 
you have four minutes. 
 
SHRI YERRAM VENKATA SUBB A REDDY (Andhra Pradesh ): Thank you, Sir, for 
giving me an opportunity to speak on th e Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Bill, 2024. This Bill is crucia l for strengthening our nation’s energy, 
security and economic growth. Energy is the backbone of any economy. A global 
energy needs and technologies change rapidly, this Bill shows India’s commitment to 
staying ahead and meeting these challenges . The original Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Act of 1948 was passed at a time began.  
Today, our economy is the fifth larg est in the world, and our energy 
requirements have grown tremendously. The way we find, extract and use energy has 
also become much more advan ced. India is at a turning point in its energy journey. 
W e  n e e d  t o  m a k e  s u r e  w e  m e e t  t h e  g rowing energy demands of our people and 
industries while reducing the pollution an d protecting the environment. The Bill aims 
to create a modern energy system that is efficient, environmental-friendly and open 
for investment.  
The positives of this Bill, Sir, are firstly, the Bill changes the definition of 
‘mineral oils’ to include more  types of hy drocarbons, such as shale gas, tight oil and 
coal bed methane in addition to crude oil and natural gas. This is not just a minor 
update, but a major step towards allowing India to explore and use a wider range of 
energy resources.  
Secondly, the Bill introduces a new concept called ‘petroleum lease’. This type 
of lease is designed to give investors stab ility and predictability as the rules and terms 
will remain consistent during the lease peri od. This sends a clear signal to global 
investors that India is serious about providing a steady and reliable policy 
environment. For the State of  Andhra Pradesh, this could mean more investments in 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
91

both offshore and onshore oil and gas expl oration. Our State has rich resources like 
the Krishna-Godavari Basin and other unexp lored areas can attract a significant 
funding and advanced technology. 
Lastly, the Bill removes criminal pena lties for breaking certain rules and 
replaces them with financial fines and struct ured systems for resolving disputes. This 
makes the environment more business-friendly, while still encouraging companies to 
follow the rules.  
Sir, I have two or three suggestions on  this Bill. There is requirement of 
specialized infrastructure for exploration and workforce in the process. This Bill’s 
provisions will require significant infrastr uctural investments. We urge the Central 
Government to develop a comprehensive f unding mechanism that supports States in 
creating necessary infrastructure for adva nced petroleum operations. The evolving 
energy landscape demands a skilled workforce. We recommend establishing 
dedicated skill development programmes, particularly in coastal and industrial regions 
like Andhra Pradesh to prepare our yout h for emerging opportunities in the 
hydrocarbon and renewable energy sectors.   
This Bill expands the definition of ‘mineral oils’ to include hydrocarbons like 
coal bed methane, shale oil and tight oil. However, the scope of this definition is 
broad, lacking clarity on the regulatory bo undaries for emerging resources such as 
hydrogen and carbon capture.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude now. 
 
SHRI YERRAM VENKATA SUBBA REDDY: One minute, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No; please conclude. 
 
SHRI YERRAM VENKATA SUBBA REDDY : This ambiguity could lead to regulatory 
overlap and conflicts between the existing environmental and industrial policies. 
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
In conclusion, while the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment) Bill 
2024, aims to create a progressive regulatory framework, addressing these issues will 
ensure its effectiveness in fostering su stainable energy growth while balancing 
economic, social, and environmental concerns.  
 
92
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj.  You have opted to 
speak in Odiya.  
 
SHRI MAJAS RANJAN MANGARAJ (Odisha):  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, thank you 
for giving me this opportunity.  I will be speaking in my mother tongue, Odia.  Sir, it 
would have been better if the Government had held discussions with the Opposition 
parties before preparing  and introducing the Oil Fields (Regulation and 
Development) Amendment Bill, 2024, in Parlia ment. This is a national issue, and the 
Bill should have been introduced only after a thorough and detailed study. However, 
how this Bill has been introduced, along wi th its purpose and effectiveness, raises 
doubts. 
Sir, coal, fossil fuels and natural gas are exhaustible resources. While fuel is an 
essential requirement in today’s world, it is also depleting. Therefore, it must be used 
judiciously. Exploration of new areas is necessary, but before enacting any law on this 
subject, the Government must see the realitie s on the ground and the interests of the 
people affected by such projects. 
The Oil Fields (Regulation and Developmen t) Act was first introduced in 1948, 
and the Union Government subsequently made Amendments in 1968-69. The 
Amendments introduced in the current Bill appear to centralize all powers with the 
Central Government. The irony li es in the fact that some sections of the Bill seem to 
cater to the interests of certain influential players. Additionally, it appears that the 
necessary due protocol for managing the op erations of the oil sector has not been 
undertaken. 
Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir,  the Bill proposes to centralize issues such as 
mergers, consolidation, and integration of the petroleum sector, production, refining, 
environmental protection, and subsidy disp utes under the purview of the Central 
Government. It also appears to neglect crit ical aspects—referred to as the '3 Ps': 
Parivesh (Environment), Paradarshita  (Transparency), and Pratijogita 
(Competition).  While the new legislation emphasizes crude oil production and 
encourages drilling and exploration activities,  it indirectly increases the risk of 
pollution. For instance, in 2009, a leak in the Haldia pipeline severely affected the 
Sahapur panchayat in Bhadrak district. In 20 17, a fire in the IOCL refinery caused a 
dangerous situation, and in 2020, an oil- carrying ship caught fire near Paradip, 
severely impacting the local environment and industries. Furthermore, in 2022, a 
pipeline leak near Paradip caused thousands of  litres of crude oil to flow into a local 
                                                            
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
93

river, affecting the lives of residents. Unfortunately, no significant relief was provided 
to the affected communities.  Such issues are not limited to oil fields. Examples can 
also be seen in coal-bearing districts su ch as Angul and Sundargarh in Odisha. 
Despite these districts contributing sign ificantly to coal production, the State 
Government receives only a nominal shar e of the royalties, whereas the Central 
Government collects four times as much in Cess. The people in these coal-affected 
areas suffer from severe pollution. Similar risk s may emerge in oil fields if these issues 
are not addressed. 
Sir, the lack of transparency in the prov isions of this Amendment Bill is deeply 
concerning. The proposed changes are likely to  reduce transparency in the leasing of 
petroleum sector assets, po tentially favouring certain large companies, which is 
worrying. At present, the country’s oil market is already dominated by a few specific 
companies.  …(Time-bell)  Sir, just on e minute!  The new rules proposed by the 
Central Government could negatively affect  the country’s oil market, with a direct 
impact on consumers. Any increase in the pri ce of fuel or petroleum will lead to a rise 
in market prices and inflation. Furthermore, the provision for imprisonment in the 1948 
Act has been abolished, which is another matter of concern. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude now.  
 
SHRI MAJAS RANJAN MANGARAJ:  Thank you, Sir. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Deputy  Chairman, Sir, I rise to participate 
in this discussion on behalf of Eda ppadi Palaniswamy, AIADMK Party General 
Secretary, on Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill. I appreciate 
the Minister's intention to increase the prod uction in India. At the same time, I would 
like to bring to the notice of the House what the experts have opined about the 
exploration plans in my State, Tamil Nadu. Th e experts have said that the Centre’s oil 
exploration plans of Kanyakumari Coast woul d severely impact fertile fishing ground 
and marine diversity. Similarly, hydrocarbo n exploration, especially in Tanjore area, 
delta area, will affect the agriculture.  Agriculture is the main thing throughout Tamil 
Nadu. If you do that kind of exploration there, it will affect the farmers. That is why 
Shri Edappadi Palaniswamy, the then Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, declared the delta 
area, Tanjore area, as a greenfield area and said that agricultural area must not be 
used for exploration of hydrocarbon.  But you know very well, our DMK Member, 
hon. lawyer, spoke very well regarding th at. During the AIADMK period, we banned 
this and Shri Edappadi Palaniswamy brought this rule to save  the farmers of the 
94
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Tanjore area. Our hon. Member from TMC sa id that the domestic petrol prices are 
increasing and the Centre is failing to control that price.  DMK Members talk of 
cooperative federalism and want  more power.  I appreciate that. But, at the same 
time, State Government has the right to reduce the petrol price also. The DMK, 
according to the manifesto, said they are going to reduce the petrol price in Tamil 
Nadu. But DMK failed to reduce the price.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions) ... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: The other Member said that petroleum price can be reduced. 
The DMK in the election manifesto said that they can reduce the petrol price, but the 
cess is not reduced. That is the thing.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are not discussing Party manifesto. ...( Interruptions) 
...  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : In the name of cooperative federalism, they want more 
power. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are not discussing cooperative federalism. 
...(Interruptions)... Please speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : At same time, the hydrocarbo n thing also was done by the 
DMK Government’s period, not AIADMK’s period.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Amendment Bill. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : They are giving wrong information here. Only  for namesake, 
they are speaking about c ooperative federalism. ...( Interruptions)... They are not 
implementing it. ...( Interruptions)...  I am appreciating whatever our Minister has 
said.  
 
 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
95

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record.  ...( Interruptions)... Ǜी 
घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): सर, मेरा बोलने क े िलए िकतना समय है? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : 15 िमनट का समय है। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जो तेलक्षेतर् ( िविनयमन तथा िवकास) 
अिधिनयम, 1948 बना था, आज उसके  Îथान नया िबल माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय लेकर आए हȅ।  
माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय ने उसकी Ģमुख िवशेषताएँ अपने ĢारिÇभक भाषण मȂ बता दी हȅ।  माननीय 
शिƪिंसह जी, वह Ģवचन नहीं था।  चूँिक Ģवचन पर ĢÌन नहीं होते हȅ, इसिलए वह भाषण था।  
वह भाषण आपने सुना। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़।   ...(Ëयवधान
)... आप चेयर को सÇबोिधत करके  बोलȂ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... आपस मȂ नहीं बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधा
न)... आपस मȂ नहीं बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह 
िरकॉडर् नहीं होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी : सर, मȅ आपको ही कह रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : नहीं , Ãलीज़।  ...(Ëयवधान)... बैठकर बात नहीं करȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आपस 
मȂ बात नहीं करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी : उपसभापित जी, यह िवधेयक उस पंचĢण की िनÍठा क े अंतगर्त लाया गया 
ह
ै, िजसमȂ भारत सरकार ने यह तय िकया है िक कोई भी ऐसा कानून, िजसमȂ गुलामी की बू आती 
हो या कोई भी ऐसा कानून, जो आज क े समय क े अनुरूप  नहीं हो, उन सारे कानूनȗ को बदलना 
है।  यह माननीय मोदी जी की सरकार ने तय िकया है।  उसके  अंतगर्त ही यह नया कानून लाया 
गया है। 
  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जब कानूनȗ की बात करते हȅ, तो भारत सरकार न
े तीन नए 
कानून न्याय, सुरक्षा  और साÑय क
े  बनाए हȅ।  उसी Ģकार से पुराने सारे कानूनȗ को बदला है। उसी 
Ģकार गुलामी क े जो सारे क े सारे पुराने िचन्ह थे, उनको िमटाने का काम िकया गया।  उसी 
Ģिकर्या मȂ जो नए काम शुरू  करने ह
ȅ, उनमȂ रेलवे का भी िबल आएगा, तेल और गैस का िबल 
हमारे सामने है।  यह नई सोच और नए पिरणाम तथा 2047 तक भारत को िवकिसत भारत बनाने, 
आत्मिनभर्र भारत बनाने क े िलए यह िबल लाया गया है।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जब हम इस पर चचार् शुरू  करते हȅ तो हम इस बात को 
अच्छी तरह से जानते हȅ िक भारत तेजी से बढ़ती अथर्ËयवÎथा है।   इसको तो सब Îवीकार कर रहे 
हȅ।  उस बढ़ती हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा क े िलए ऊजार् एक बहुत बड़ी आवÌयकता है और उस ऊजार् की 
पूिर्त क े िलए हमȂ नए-नए कानून और नए-नए क्षेतर् खोजने पड़Ȃगे।  अगर हम इस बात पर चचार् 
96
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

करȂगे िक भारत की जो बढ़ती हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा है, उसको क ु छ समय मȂ 5 िटर्िलयन डॉलर की 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाने क े िलए 1,123 िमिलयन टन समतुÊय तेल की आवÌयकता पड़ेगी।  आज जो 
भारत की िÎथित है, उसके  अनुसार आज हमारे यहाँ 85 Ģितशत आयात से हमारा काम चलता है 
और 10 से  15 Ģितशत क े बीच ही हम हमारे घरेलू उत्पाद से काम चलाते हȅ।  आज आवÌयकता 
इस बात की है िक आयात पर हमारी िनभर्रता कम हो और हमारा उत्पादन बढ़े।  इस Ģकार क े 
नए-नए क्षेतर् आएँ, िजनके  माध्यम से हम काम कर सकȂ ।  इसके  साथ ही साथ मȅ दो बात िवशेष 
रूप  से कहना चाहूँगा।  यहाँ पर दो बातȂ बहुत गलत तरीके  से कही गईं।  पहली बात तो यह कही 
गई िक दुिनया म
Ȃ तेल की कीमतȂ कम हुईं और भारत मȂ कम नहीं हुईं।  माननीय उपसभापित 
महोदय, मोदी जी क े न
ेतृत्व मȂ भारत एकमातर् ऐसा देश है जहाँ कोरोना काल से लेकर अब तक, 
सारी दुिनया भर मȂ तेल और गैस की कीमतȂ बढ़ीं, क ेवल भारत ही ऐसा देश है जहाँ पर 10 से 15 
Ģितशत तक इसकी कीमतȂ कम हुईं।  इसके  िलए मȅ  माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक हमने पािकÎतान को देखा, 
Ǜीलंका को द
ेखा, Çयांमार को देखा और भारत को भी देखा।  भारत मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ ऊजार् 
संरिक्षत देश बना - यह बहुत बड़ी बात है।  म
ȅ यह कहना चाहूँगा िक इसके  साथ-साथ हमने िकतने 
काम िकए हȅ, जैसे उज्ज्वला योजना चलाई है।   दुिनया मȂ तेल और ग
ैस क े दाम बढ़े हȗगे, लेिकन 
हमारे यहाँ तो 15 Ģितशत कम हुए हȅ, लेिकन उस गरीब क े बारे मȂ, जो गरीबȗ की बात करने वाले 
हȅ, आज तक उन्हȗने गरीबȗ क े बारे मȂ नहीं सोचा िक 500 रुपए  मȂ 10 करोड़ 55 लाख लोगȗ को, 
गरीब मिहलाओं को कोई सरकार गैस उपलÅध करा सकती है, तो वह मोदी जी की सरकार है।  
इसिलए उसमȂ नई बात लाने की आवÌयकता नहीं है।  उसी Ģकार से अभी एक माननीय सदÎया ने 
कहा िक रूस  से ... माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आप राÍटर् क े Ģित दृढ़ता का अंदाज लगाइए। 
जब यूकर् े न और रूस  का युǉ शुरू  हो गया और यूरोिपयन क
ं टर्ीज़ तथा अमेिरका ने रूस  पर 
सȅक्शन्स लगाए, बैन लगा िदए।  उन्हȗने भारत पर भी दबाव डाला िक आप रूस  से कर्ूड ऑयल 
मत खरीिदए, लेिकन भारत दबाव मȂ नहीं आया।  भारत ने साफ कह िदया िक हम िकसी भी 
कीमत पर हमारे राÍटर् िहतȗ क
े  साथ समझौता नहीं कर सकते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  भारत ने अपने 
राÍटर्ीय िहतȗ क े साथ समझौता नहीं िकया और हमने यूरोप और अमेिरका क े दबाव क े बावजूद 
कर्ूड ऑयल रूस  से खरीदने का काम चालू रखा और 30 Ģितशत कम कीमत पर हमने कर्ूड ऑयल 
खरीदा।  क
े वल खरीदा ही नहीं, बिÊक इसका जो एक दूसरा सबसे बड़ा उदाहरण सामने आया, 
वह यह है िक अभी क ु छ िदनȗ पहले एक बहुत बड़ी खबर आई िक यूरोप मȂ अमेिरका और सऊदी 
अरब से भी ज्यादा पेटर्ोल एक्सपोटर् करने वाला द
ेश भारत बन गया है।  भारत तो कर्ूड तेल आयात 
करता है, लेिकन भारत ने प
ेटर्ोल का िनयार्त कहां से िकया?  भारत ने रूस  और ईरान से जो कर्ूड 
ऑयल खरीदा, उसका पेटर्ोल बनाकर उसको यूरोप मȂ भेजा।  इससे बड़ा राÍटर् िहत का काम और 
िंचतन का काम नहीं हो सकता है।  इसी क े कारण इस देश मȂ Ģाइसेज़ क ंटर्ोÊड रही हȅ।  इसका 
एकमातर् कारण है िक इस कर्ाइिसस क े पीिरयड मȂ भारत सरकार ने इन सारी योजनाओं को 
बनाकर रखा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक इसी क े साथ-साथ, आज हमने 
एथेनॉल बनाने का भी काम िकया।  इससे 1 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का आयात कम हुआ।  भारत ने इस 
Ģकार क े कई काम िकए हȅ।  सोलर एनजीर् क े िलए एक नया संÎथान बनाया गया।  दुिनया क े 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
97

राÍटर्ȗ को एक करके  इसके  काम को करने की शुरुआत  की गई।  हमने बायो डीजल क े िलए काम 
शुरू  िकया और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े िलए भी काम शुरू  िकया।  भारत सरकार जो यह िवधेयक 
लायी है, इसमȂ वह दो काम कर रही है।  पहला, माइिंनग को इससे अलग िकया जा रहा है।  हमारे 
कई माननीय सदÎय कह रहे थे िक माइिंनग को इससे अलग क्यȗ िकया जा रहा है, तो मȅ बताना 
चाहता हूं िक माइिंनग पूरी तरह से एक अलग सेक्टर हो गया है, िजसको आज इससे अलग करने 
की आवÌयकता है।   
दूसरा, िजन क्षेतर्ȗ क े बारे मȂ हमȂ आशा है िक वहां हाइडर्ोकाबर्न, नैचुरल गैस या पेटर्ोिलयम 
पदाथर् िमल सकते हȅ, उसके  िसफर् 10% का एक्सÃलोरेशन ही इस समय भारत मȂ हुआ है, 90% 
का नहीं हुआ है।  उसको करने क े िलए इसमȂ यह छू ट दी गई है िक बड़ी क ंपिनयां, जो िवदेशȗ मȂ 
काम करती हȅ और जो टेिक्नकली साउंड हȅ, वे सब भारत मȂ आकर काम करȂ।  जब वे भारत मȂ 
काम करȂगी तो उससे हमारी उत्पादन करने की क्षमता बढ़ेगी।  इसमȂ यह Ģावधान भी िकया गया 
है।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ तीसरा Ãवाइंट यह कहना चाहता हूं िक अभी दुिनया भर 
मȂ ऊजार् की िजतनी खपत होती है, उसकी 14% खपत  भारत मȂ वषर् 2025 तक होगी और वषर् 
2047 से 2050 तक उसकी 24% से लेकर 25% तक  की खपत भारत मȂ होगी।  िजस देश मȂ 
िवकास क े िलए दुिनया की ऊजार् खपत की 25% की आवÌयकता होगी, उस देश को इस Ģकार 
क े दूरदृिÍट वाले कानूनȗ की आगे आवÌयकता है और उसी दूरदृिÍट क े साथ यह कानून लाया गया 
है, िजसमȂ इन सब बातȗ का Ģावधान िकया गया है।  अभी खनन की बात हो रही थी।  हमारे ऐसे 
बहुत से क्षेतर् पड़े हुए हȅ, िजनमȂ गहराई मȂ जाकर खनन करने की आवÌयकता है, लेिकन पता नहीं 
हमारी क ंपिनयां कर पाती हȅ या नहीं कर पाती हȅ।  मुझे यह कहते हुए िबÊकु ल संकोच नहीं है िक 
यूपीए सरकार का जो 10 साल का पीिरयड था, उसमȂ खनन का एक भी पƺा नहीं िदया गया और 
खनन का काम नहीं हुआ था।  उसके  बाद, अब खनन को गित िमली है, खनन का काम बढ़ा है।  
इसमȂ हमने तीन-चार बातȗ मȂ बड़ा पिरवतर्न कर िदया है।  हमने खिनज तेल की पिरभाषा बदली 
िक खिनज तेल कौन सा होता है और खनन एवं पेटर्ोिलयम गितिविधयȗ को अलग कर िदया।  अब 
माइिंनग का काम अलग है और पेटर्ोिलयम का काम अलग है।  िववाद का समाधान करने क े िलए 
हमने आिर्बटर्ेटर की ËयवÎथा की है।  िववादȗ क े समाधान हेतु जैसा िक माननीय मोदी जी क े 
कायर्काल मȂ हुआ है िक एक जनिवÌवास िवधेयक आया था, िजसमȂ 82 कान ूनȗ मȂ से 
"आपरािधक" शÅद हटा िदया गया था।  इसमȂ भी अपराध करके  जेल जाने का जो Ģावधान था, 
उस जेल क े Ģावधान को हटाकर आिर्बटर्ेशन का Ģावधान कर िदया गया है।  इससे बाहर से जो 
लोग आएंगे, वे चाहȂ तो भारत मȂ आिर्बटर्ेशन न कराकर भारत क े बाहर भी आिर्बटर्ेशन करा सकते 
हȅ।  इस Ģकार की छू ट देकर उन क ंपिनयȗ को यहां बुलाने का काम िकया गया है।  इसी Ģकार, 
इसमȂ िनणार्यक Ģािधकारी और अपील का Ģावधान भी िकया गया है, तािक न्याय भी िमले, समय 
पर िमले और इसमȂ कोई आपरािधक ĢवृिǄ क े कारण न आए।  इसमȂ इस बात का भी ध्यान रखा 
गया है। इसके  ढांचे मȂ पिरवतर्न िकया गया है, िडकाबर्नाइज़ेशन, आधुिनक ÎवाÎथ्य, ऊजार् 
पिरयोजनाओं मȂ पिरवतर्न िकया गया है। अब हमने कहा है िक 2030 तक ज़ीरो एिमशन मȂ जाएंगे, 
तो उसके  िलए िजस Ģकार का काम करना है, उन कामȗ का Ģावधान इस नए िवधेयक मȂ आया है। 
इस Ģकार से यह तेल क्षेतर् मȂ सुरक्षा, पयार्वरण और Îथलȗ की खोज है। जैसा अभी माननीय 
98
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

सदÎय कह रहे थे िक वहां खनन होगा, तो खेती को नुकसान होगा, मत्Îय पालन को नुकसान 
होगा, तो उसकी सुरक्षा करने क े िलए एक सामुदाियक क्षेतर् का Ģावधान िकया गया है िक उस क्षेतर् 
क े लोग जहां खनन िकया जाएगा, उन लोगȗ को नौकिरयȗ मȂ और उनकी आिर्थक िÎथित मȂ 
संरक्षण की ËयवÎथा करने का काम इस एक्ट मȂ िकया गया है, िजसके  कारण से उनको िकसी 
Ģकार की तकलीफ नहीं होगी। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहूंगा िक यह िबल 
भारत सरकार की नई सोच, नया दृिÍटकोण, आत्मिनभर्र भारत और ऊजार् मȂ आत्मिनभर्र भारत 
बनाने का एक बहुत बड़
ा कदम है। मȅ इस कदम का Îवागत करता ह
ूं और इसी क े साथ इसका 
समथर्न करते हुए अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Shri Abdul Wahab; not pres ent.  Dr. Kalpana Saini; you 
have ten minutes. 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी ( उǄराखंड) : उपसभापित  महोदय, तेलक्षेतर् ( िविनयमन तथा िवकास) 
संशोधन िवधेयक, 2024 को 5 अगÎत 2024 को राज्य सभा म
Ȃ पेश िकया गया। यह िवधेयक 
तेलक्षेतर् ( िविनयमन तथा िवकास) अिधिनयम, 1948 मȂ संशोधन करता है। यह अिधिनयम 
Ģाकृ ितक गैस और पेटर्ोिलयम की खोज और िनÍकषर्ण को िनयंितर्त करता है। मȅ आज इस सदन 
क े समक्ष तेलक्षेतर् ( िविनयमन तथा िवकास) संशोधन िवधेयक, 2024 क े समथर्न मȂ अपनी बात 
रखने क
े  िलए खड़ी हुई हूं।  
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की ÎपÍट सोच को देश क े सामने पंचĢण क े माध्यम से यह 
िवधेयक Ģकट करता है। कोई भी राÍटर् तेज़ गित से तभी आगे बढ़ सकता है, जब वह पुरानी 
चुनौितयȗ को पराÎत करते हुए अपनी ज्यादा से ज्यादा ऊजार् भिवÍय िनमार्ण मȂ लगाए। यह कायर् 
मेरे देश क े आदरणीय
 Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े न
ेतृत्व मȂ हुआ है। िपछले 10 वषș मȂ भारत ने राÍटर्िहत मȂ 
ऐसे अनेक कायș को पूरा होते देखा है, िजनका इंतज़ार देश क े लोगȗ को दशकȗ से था। एनडीए 
की सरकार ने Ģधानमंतर्ी जी क े िरफॉमर्, परफॉमर् और टर्ांसफॉमर् क े अपने किमटमȂट को लगातार 
जारी रखा है।  
आदरणीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी क
े  नेतृत्व मȂ एनडीए सरकार ने खिनज तेलȗ की पिरभाषा मȂ भी 
िवÎतार इस िवधेयक मȂ िकया है, जो आज तेज़ी से बदलते भारत क े िलए आवÌयक था। अिधिन
यम 
मȂ खिनज तेलȗ की पिरभाषा मȂ पेटर्ोिलयम और Ģाकृ ितक गैस को शािमल िकया गया है। िवधेयक मȂ 
पिरभाषा का िवÎतार करते हुए इसमȂ िनÇनिलिखत को शािमल िकया गया है। कोई भी Ģाकृ ितक 
रूप  से पाया जाने वाला हाइडर्ोकाबर्न, कोल बेड, मीथेन, श
ैल गैस, तेल, सीबीजी और सूयर् ऊजार्। 
यह ÎपÍट करता है खिनज तेलȗ मȂ कोयला, िलग्नाइट या हीिलयम शािमल नहीं हȗ। यह िवधेयक 
न क ेवल भारत क े ऊजार् क्षेतर् म
Ȃ सुधार का Ģतीक है, बिÊक यह हमारे देश को ऊजार् आत्मिनभर्रता 
की ओर अगर्सर करने का एक दूरदशीर् कदम भी है। आज िवÌव मȂ तेज़ी से बदलाव हो रहा है। यिद 
हमȂ अपनी वैिÌवक िÎथित को मज़बूत करना है, तो हमȂ अन्वेषण और उत्पादन को बढ़ावा द
ेना ही 
होगा।  
यह िवधेयक भारत को अन्वेषण और उत्पादन का पावर हाउस बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक 
मजबूत नींव रखता है। हम सभी जानते हȅ िक भारत अपनी कच्चे तेल की आवÌयकता का 85 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
99

Ģितशत और Ģाकृ ितक गैस की आवÌयकता का लगभग 50 Ģितशत आयात क े माध्यम से पूरा 
करता है। यह िÎथित न क ेवल हमारे िवदेशी मुदर्ा भंडार पर भारी दबाव डालती है, बिÊक हमारी 
ऊजार् सुरक्षा को भी कमज़ोर करती है। इस िवधेयक का मुख्य उǈेÌय घरेलू उत्पादन को बढ़ावा 
देना है, तािक आयात पर हमारी िनभर्रता कम हो और देश की ऊजार् ज़रूरत Ȃ Îवदेशी ǣोतȗ से प
ूरी 
हो सकȂ । इस िबल क े असंख्य लाभ हȅ, िजसमȂ से क ु छ मुख्य लाभȗ का मȅ वणर्न करना चाहूंगी,  जैसे 
घरेलू उत्पादन को Ģोत्साहन िमलेगा, खिनज तेलȗ की पिरभाषा मȂ कच्चा तेल, Ģाकृ ितक गैस, 
कोल बेड मीथेन, शेल गैस और टाइड
 ऑयल जैसे गैर-पारंपिरक ऊजार् ǣोतȗ को शािमल िकया 
गया है।  यह कदम घरेलू ऊजार् उत्पादन बढ़ाने और आयात पर िनभर्रता कम करने मȂ मदद करता 
है।  यह देश मȂ िनवेश को Ģोत्सािहत करेगा, पेटर्ोिलयम लीज की शुरुआत  और अंतरराÍटर्ीय 
मध्यÎथता की अनुमित जैसे Ģावधान वैिÌवक और घरेलू िनवेशकȗ को आकिर्षत करȂगे और इससे 
तेल और गैस क्ष
ेतर् मȂ नई तकनीकȗ और संसाधनȗ का समावेश होगा।  इससे नीितगत िÎथरता भी 
आएगी, दीघर्कािलक पƺȗ की ËयवÎथा और दंड Ģावधानȗ को सरल बनाकर तेल और गैस 
उत्पादकȗ क े िलए एक िÎथर और अनुक ू ल वातावरण तैयार िकया गया है।   
भारत, जो 2014 मȂ िवÌव की िगरती हुई 10 वीं अथर्ËयवÎथा था, आज हमारे आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेत
ृत्व मȂ पांचवीं अथर्ËयवÎथा बन गया है।  आज सारा िवÌव Îवीकार 
कर रहा है िक हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े न
ेतृत्व मȂ क ु छ ही वषș मȂ भारत िवÌव की तीसरी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा होगा।  इस बढ़ती हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ ऊजार् क्षेतर् का बड़ा योगदान होगा।  भारत क े 
पास 651.8 िमिलयन टन कच्चे तेल और 1138.6 िबिलयन क्यूिबक मीटर Ģाकृ ितक गैस का भंडार 
है।  इन संसाधनȗ का अन्वेषण और उत्पादन आिर्थक िवकास को तो करेगा ही, रोजगार स
ृजन को 
भी गित देगा।  िवÌव मȂ ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हो रही Ģगित, नए-
नए ऊजार् क े संसाधन, देश की बढ़ती आत्मिनभर्रता क ेवल और क ेवल Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
एनडीए की सरकार की चमत्कारी, आत्मिवÌवासी, िवÌवभर मȂ मान्यता ĢाÃत नीितयां हȅ, जो 2047 
तक देश को पूणर् आत्मिनभर्र भारत बनाएंगी।  ऐसी िÎथित मȂ यह िवधेयक क ेवल एक
 कानूनी 
दÎतावेज नहीं है, बिÊक यह भारत को ऊजार्, आत्मिनभर्रता की िदशा मȂ एक अभूतपूवर् कदम 
होगा।  यह घरेलू उत्पादन को बढ़ावा देगा और भारत की ऊजार् सुरक्षा को मजबूत करेगा।  इसिलए 
मȅ इस िवधेयक का पूरी तरह से समथर्न करती हूं और सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ से अनुरोध करती हूं 
िक वे इस िवधेयक क े पक्ष मȂ मतदान करȂ।  यह हमारे देश क े ऊजार् क्षेतर् मȂ सुधार और आत्मिनभर्र 
भारत क
े  लÑय को साकार करने की िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है।  मȅ इसका समथर्न करती हूं, 
धन्यवाद।     
                                                              
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद, डा. कÊपना सैनी जी। माननीय डा. फौिजया खान।  आपके  पास तीन 
िमनट का समय है।   
 
डा. फौिजया खान (महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित महोदय, एक मशहूर गज़ल का एक श
ेर है,  
  
"हर तरफ भागते दौड़ते राÎते, 
हर तरफ आदमी का िशकार आदमी।" 
100
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 सर, यही मनुÍय का इितहास कहता है।  इसिलए कानून ËयवÎथा होती है।  सवाल यह है 
िक whether fraudulent activities are not possi ble in this sector at all, Sir.   अगर है, तो 
कानून की सहानुभूित िकसके  साथ अिधक होनी चािहए।  जो अन्याय करता है, उसके  साथ या 
िजस पर अन्याय होता है, उसके  साथ। सर, कायदे बनाते समय इस बात को ध्यान मȂ रखना 
जरूरी  है और इसिलए सेक्शन 9, सब  सेक्शन (1) और ( 3)  क े अनुसार इस एक्ट को 
decriminalize करना उिचत नहीं है, ऐसा मुझे लगता है। 
 
ﺍُپ ﺳﺒﻬﺎﭘﺘﯽ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﺍﻳﮏ ﻣﺸﮩﻮﺭ ﻏﺰﻝ ﮐﺎ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺷﻌﺮ ﮨﮯ ؎ 
ﮨﺮ ﻁﺮﻑ ﻬﺎﮔﺘﮯﺑ ﺩﻭڑﺗﮯ ﺭﺍﺳﺘﮯ، 
ﮨﺮ ﻁﺮﻑ ﺍٓﺩﻣﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺷﮑﺎﺭ ﺍٓﺩﻣﯽ 
 ﺳﺮ، ﻳﮩﯽ ﺍﻧﺴﺎﻥ ﮐﺎ ﺍِﺗﮩﺎﺱ ﮐﮩﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻗﺎﻧﻮﻥ ﻭﻳﻮﺳﺘﻬﺎ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہare fraudulent 
activities not possible in this sector at all, Sir?   ﺍﮔﺮ ﮨﮯ، ﺗﻮ ﻗﺎﻧﻮﻥ ﮐﯽ ﺳﮩﺎﻧﻮﺑﻬﻮﺗﯽ ﮐﺲ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ 
ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﮨﻮﻧﯽ ﭼﺎﮨﻴﮯ۔ ﺟﻮ ﻧﺎﺍﻧﺼﺎﻓﯽ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ ﻳﺎ ﺟﺲ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ ﻧﺎﺍﻧﺼﺎﻓﯽ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ ۔ ﺳﺮ، 
ﻗﺎﻋﺪے ﺑﻨﺎﺗﮯ ﻭﻗﺖ ﺍﺱ ﺑﺎﺕ ﮐﻮ ﺩﻫﻴﺎﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﮐﻬﻨﺎ ﺿﺮﻭﺭی ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﺱ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺳﻴﮑﺸﻦ9، ﺳﺐ ﺳﻴﮑﺸﻦ1)  ﺍﻭﺭ( 3) 
ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﺍﺱ ﺍﻳﮑﭧ ﮐﻮdecriminalize ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺐ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﻳﺴﺎ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﻟﮕﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ 
This will not be a significant deterren t for people or companies engaged in 
mineral oil operations.  While focusing on Ease of Doing Business, this aspect cannot 
be compromised.  Several examples exist wh ere public debts have been used to pay 
off penalties.  In case of monetary default,  strict civil provisions for imprisonment 
apply to ordinary citizens in tenancy regula ti
ons, commercial courts, in MSEBs, etc. 
 
Why is it not here?  Clause 5 ( 3) introduces a new sub-s ection promoting stable 
terms for petroleum leases.  While this will help encourage in vestment in the sector by 
promising stability, it will also restrict the Government flexibility to  review its terms in 
case of adverse developments. Terms and co nditions, therefore, should be dynamic 
rather than fixed. That is my opinion.  
Sir, I would like to mention a scam of approximately Rs.10,000 crore, which 
happened in Maharashtra in 201 2 and 2013, but nothing has been done so far. This is 
regarding gate passes that are issued fo r bitumen. These gate passes are totally 
Government-controlled. The gate pass bitumen challan mentions the rate, the 
quantity, the name of the consignee, and all these details are there. The refineries 
said that they did not issue these passes.  The people concerned printed duplicate 
passes and used them all over the State.  The Public Accounts Committee in its 2012 
Report said that an FIR should be filed against those concerned. SE filed an FIR 
against the contractor, as is usually done, but nothing was done against the officials 
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
101

with whose connivance all this took place. Besides, this took place all over the State, 
in different regions of Maharashtra like Nasik, Nagpur, etc. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Just half a minute, Sir! So, in spite of this happening everywhere, 
no cognizance was taken. And, in 2014, the Government of Maharashtra changed 
and this stopped. I request the Minister to  please take up this issue and make sure 
that FIRs are filed against those concerned because if you don't take people to task, 
then fraudulent activities will go on. Thank you. 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR (Himachal Pradesh): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I thank you 
for giving me the opportunity to speak on an important Bill, the Oilfields (Regulation 
and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024. I wo uld also like to congratulate the hon. 
Minister for making important amendments in this Bill, which really promotes the 
energy sector in the global energy market.  
Sir, the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024, is a 
monumental step towards transforming In dia's energy landscape by enhancing 
investors' confidence and positioning Bharat  as a key player in the global energy 
market. The Bill seeks to establish a fram ework that fosters investment in both 
traditional and cleaner energy sources by  redefining mineral oils to encompass 
cleaner energy sources like hydrogen, alig ning with Modi Government’s goal of 
increasing non-fossil fuel energy capacity by 2.5 times.  
With significant projects like ONGC cluster project in the Krishna-Godavari 
Basin, this Bill aims to not only boost dome stic production, but also position Bharat 
as a leader in the global transition to su stainable energy, paving the way for a Vikshit 
Bharat by 2047. Treatment of petroleum oper ation same as mining activities failed to 
consider their specific environmental effect s. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas took a far-reaching decision regarding de-linking of petroleum operation from 
mining. Sir, de-linking was crucial for a ddressing environmental concern affecting 
ecologically sensitive regions like Assam, where improper manageme nt could lead to 
irreversible damage. By implementing th is de-linking, the Bill transforms the 
regulatory framework for hydrocarbon projects.  In addition to simplifying the process 
for obtaining environmental clearances, it removes bureaucratic obstacles and 
prioritise sustainable practices.  
Deputy Chairman, Sir, the present Bill is in line with the BJP-led NDA 
Government focus on enhancing the Ease of  Doing Business by transforming the oil 
102
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

and gas sector. Under the Modi Governme nt, Bharat crude oil import dependence 
decreased to USD 62,248 billion in 2020 -21, contrasting sharply with the UPA 
Government era when the dependence had increased almost two-fold to USD 
1,42,962 billion in 2013-14 due to policy para lysis and lack of investment. The present 
Bill is designed to create a conducive environment for investment by ensuring policy 
stability, streamlining regulatory processe s, and providing mechanism for dispute 
resolution, the Modi Government is posting growth and innovation in the sector.   
Further, the Bill paves the way for increa sed foreign exploration in Bharat by 
establishing a more stable and transpar ent regulatory environment. By allowing 
international companies to engage in pe troleum operation with clear terms and a 
dispute resolution mechanism, the Bill ai ms to attract foreign investments and 
expertise.  This strategic move not only boosts domestic production but also 
positions Bharat as a competitive player in the global energy market reducing reliance 
on imports and enhancing energy security .  Hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra 
Modi’s strategic geopolitical moves have si gnificantly bolstered Bharat's position in 
the global energy landscape.  Under the Modi Government, Bharat has demonstrated 
remarkable strategic thinking in navigating geopolitical realities, ensuring that India 
secures effective prices for crude oil by importing from Russia.  The present Bill 
supports this objective, which is to transform India's energy landscape by establishing 
a framework that fosters investment in bo th traditional and cleaner energy sources, 
securing the position of Vishwa Bandhu Bharat .  Sir, under the Interim Budget for 
2024-25, the Modi Government had stated  its commitment to green growth and 
sustainable development to combat the eff ects of climate change.  The present Bill 
emphasizes sustainable practices in the oil and gas sector by requiring the reporting 
of carbon and greenhouse gas emissions and facilitating comprehensive energy 
projects at oilfields that incorporate renewa l sources like solar and wind.  It also 
promotes the adoption of decarbonizing t echnologies such as green hydrogen and 
carbon capture utilization and storage. Th is commitment to balancing economic 
development with environmental responsibility reflects the Government dedication to 
green India, a key pillar of Prime Minister Modi ji’s vision for a sustainable future. The 
enactment of such a compre hensive Bill demonstrates India's commitment to reduce 
dependence on energy imports and boost domestic production. The present Bill 
promotes adequate opportunities for risk mitigation, ensuring stability in petroleum 
exploration and addressing energy transition issues, including the development of 
next generation cleaner fuels like hydrogen by creating a st able and investor friendly 
environment that attracts investment and expedites petroleum operations. The Bill is 
another step in Prime Minister Narendra Modiji’s  vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat.  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
103

Sir, in conclusion, I would like to say that the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Amendment Bill, 2024 seeks to enhance investors' confidence in 
India's oil and gas sector. The Bill aims to  boost investment in India's oil and gas 
sector by providing stable lease term s, enabling arbitration and streamlining 
operations. Thereby, I support this Bill which addressing long-standing industry 
demands by providing stable lease terms polic y stability and regularity clarity.  With 
these words, I support this Bill and reques t all the hon. Members to support this 
Amendment in the Oilfields (Regulation an d Development) Bill, 2024, which create a 
more investor-friendly environment by addressing long-standing concern about policy 
stability and regulatory clarity, which are e ssential for attracting  both domestic and 
foreign investment. Thank you very much. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The next speaker is Shri P.P. Suneer; you have three 
minutes. 
 
SHRI P.P. SUNEER (Kerala):  The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Bill, 2024 is yet another attempt by the Union Government to handover 
natural resources of the nation to corp orate houses in the name of attracting 
investments and “Ease of Doing Business” . It has become a pattern for the BJP to 
frame laws to suit corporate needs instead of what is good for the general public; this 
Bill is another attempt at that.  
The Bill seeks to legally separate petroleum and other naturally occurring 
hydrocarbons extraction from mining op erations, with potentially disastrous 
consequences for the environment. The B ill is also an example of Government’s 
double speak on promoting new and renewa ble energy sources and, at the same 
time, promoting oil extraction by private play ers. The Bill, by separating mining from 
oil extraction, is opening floodgates for destruction of environment, which the Ministry 
itself has noted. While the official positi on of the Ministry is that they will not 
compromise on environmental safeguar ds, we all know how environmental 
regulations have ended in dustbins to clear way for corporate houses into country’s 
forests and natural resources.  
The Bill is explicitly promoting …( Interruption)… natural resources by diluting 
penalties in cases of violations. While the earlier Act had provisions both for 
imprisonment and penalties, the Bill is prop osing a highest penalty of Rs. 25 lakh for 
offences under the Bill with no imprisonment! This is in effect upholding the ‘polluters 
pay’ principles without fixing concrete responsibility. Corporate plunder of natural 
resources will see new heights as no violator is  in fear of jail. This clearly exposes that 
104
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

the BJP prioritizes corporate comfort over  exploitation of our precious natural 
resources. 
At the end, it is our understanding  that State-led oil and natural gas 
enterprises, like the ONGC, should be prioritized instead of private players in the 
sector for the sake of the economy and the people. ONGC is a competent 
organization but Government is aggressively  promoting private players in the sector. 
We have seen how a corp orate house tried to …( Interruption)… the Ministry and the 
ONGC by illegally extracting natural gas from the KG Basin a few years back. The 
Government should stop weaken ing the public sector and …(Interruption )… the 
people in the name of ‘Ease of Doing Business’, which has become synonymous with 
crony capitalism under the BJP. 
  
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड) :  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी Ǜी हरदीप िंसह पुरी 
जी ǎारा लाए गए तेलक्षेतर् (िविनयमन तथा िवकास) संशोधन िवधेयक, 2024 क े पक्ष मȂ बोलने क े 
िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं।   महोदय, कानून मȂ संशोधन की आवÌयकता तब पड़ती है, जब उस क्षेतर् मȂ 
िवकास की दर कम होती है।  भारत एक बहुत बड़ा देश है और िजस Ģकार से भारत क े अंदर 
आिर्थक समृिǉ बढ़ रही है, िजस Ģकार स
े देश क े अंदर उǏोग Îथािपत हो रहे हȅ, तो मȅ िनिÌचत 
रूप  से कह सकता ह
ूं िक ऊजार् की मांग बढ़नी Îवाभािवक है।    
भारत ने Îवतंतर्ता क े बाद कच्चे तेल क े उत्पादन मȂ भी उÊलेखनीय वृिǉ की है।   मȅ यह 
बात इसिलए कह रहा हूं िक आिखरकार िजस देश क े सीिमत राज्य ही तेल उत्पादन क्षेतर् मȂ है, 
वहां पर कच्चे तेल का उत्पादन बढ़े, Ģाकृ ितक गैस का उत्पादन बढ़े, इसके  िलए सरकारȗ ǎारा 
Ģयास िकए जाते हȅ और उन्हीं Ģयासȗ का यह पक्ष है िक आज हमारे देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय 
मोदी जी की सरकार ǎारा इस िदशा मȂ एक बड़ा कदम उठाया जा रहा है।   भारत मȂ प
ैटर्ोल 
उत्पादȗ की खपत 230 एमएमटी है और उसके  कारण भारत मȂ आयात की दर लगातार बढ़ रही 
है, जो िक वतर्मान िÎथित मȂ 85% से अिधक है।  आज भारत मȂ Ģितिदन 1,16,370.64 बैरल तेल 
का उत्पादन हो रहा है, जो िक िवÌव मȂ 20वȂ Îथान पर है। कच्चे तेल क े उत्पादन मȂ सीिमत राज्य, 
िजसकी म
ȅने चचार् की, राजÎथान की िहÎसेदारी सवार्िधक है; गुजरात 12.5 Ģितशत क े आधार पर 
द
ूसरे नंबर पर है; असम मȂ 12 Ģितशत है; आंधर् Ģदेश क े अंदर भी तेल क े उत्पादन की गित बढ़ी 
है; लेिकन दुख तब होता है, जब पिÌचमी बंगाल क े अंदर ओएनजीसी Ģयास करता है, एक हजार 
करोड़ रुपए  खचर् होते हȅ, लेिकन उसके  बाद भी वहां की सरकार, तेल उत्पादन मȂ जो राज्य और 
अगर्णी भूिमका िनभा सकता है, उस पर ध्यान नहीं दे रही है।  पिÌचमी ब
ंगाल को इससे आठ 
हजार करोड़ रुपए  का फायदा हो सकता है।  पिÌचमी बंगाल क े ब
ंधु बोल रहे थे, इसिलए मȅने 
इसका उÊलेख करना उिचत समझा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
  
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप दोनȗ बैठ जाइए।  आप बैिठए, Ãलीज़। 
 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
105

Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ : महोदय , भारत मȂ तेल उत्पादन लगातार घट रहा है और खाड़ी युǉ क े बाद तो 
एक Ģकार से मȅ कह सकता हूं िक उत्पादन की क्षमता बहुत ज्यादा िगरी है। सरकार ǎारा 
बायोगैस क े उत्पादन को Ģोत्साहन देने क े िनणर्य क े बाद Ģितवषर् 15 एमएमटी की वृिǉ की 
संभावना बनी हुई है, जो इस िवधेयक क े पािरत होने क े बाद एक Îवरूप ĢाÃत करेगी, जो पिरवहन 
क्षेतर् मȂ Ģाकृ ितक गैस की खपत को पूरा करेगी, यह मȅ िवÌवासपूवर्क कह सकता हूं
।  Ģधान मंतर्ी, 
मोदी जी का लÑय िजस क्षेतर् मȂ हम पीछे हȅ, उस क्षेतर् क े िवकास को बढ़ाया जाए, इस पर रहता है। 
हम जानते हȅ िक िवदेशȗ पर िनभर्र तेल और Ģाकृ ितक गैस की जो िÎथित भारतवषर् म
Ȃ बनी हुई है, 
उसके  िलए आज क े पिरĢेÑय म
Ȃ िकस Ģकार क े गुणात्मक सुधार िकए जा सकते हȅ, कानून मȂ 
संशोधन िकया जा सकता है, उसके  िलए यह िवधेयक बहुत महत्वपूणर् है। कच्चे तेल क े उत्पादन 
एवं Ģाकृ ितक गैस क
े  क्षेतर् मȂ Ģितिदन खोजȂ चल रही हȅ, वैज्ञािनक उन क्षेतर्ȗ का चयन कर रहे हȅ, 
िजनकी संख्या अभी Ģितवषर् बढ़ रही है। महोदय, सरकार का लÑय है िक पेटर्ोल एवं गैस क े क्षेतर् मȂ 
दूसरे देशȗ की िनभर्रता को कम िकया जाए। कच्चे तेल एवं गैस क े क्षेतर् म
Ȃ उत्पादन को अनेक 
सरकारी अड़चनȗ की िदक्कतȂ आती हȅ। आिखरकार जब िवधेयक लाने का पक्ष रहा होगा, तो मȅ 
इस बात को िवÌवासपूवर्क कह सकता हूं िक िवदेश क
े  अंदर अगर Ģाइवेट सेक्टर से लेकर 
सरकारी क्षेतर् क े लोगȗ ने भी तेल क े उत्पादन को गित दी है, तो उसमȂ उनकी सरकारȗ का बहुत 
बड़ा योगदान रहा है। उǏिमयȗ को िकस Ģकार की सहायता दी जाए, उǏ
िमयȗ को िकस Ģकार 
इस क्षेतर् मȂ आगे बढ़ाया जाए, उसके  िलए सरकार क े ǎारा Ģयास होते हȅ। मुझे कहते हुए खेद भी है 
िक 2014 से पहले एक भी जो गैस नामांकन क्षेतर् है, उसके  अंतगर्त गैस उत्पादन क े िलए कोई नया 
पƺा नहीं िदया गया था, उसके  कारण यह काम रुका  रहा। यह और बढ़ सकता था, लेिकन बढ़ाने 
का Ģयास नहीं िकया गया। महोदय, आिखर जो भी िनवेशक होता है, उसके  अंदर िवÌवास जागृत 
करना बहुत आवÌयक है, क्यȗिक तेल का क्षेतर् बहुत महंगा क्षेतर् है, उसमȂ काफी पूंजी िनवेश
 की 
आवÌयकता रहती है। िनवेशकȗ का िवÌवास बढ़े, इसके  िलए इस िवधेयक का आना िनतांत 
आवÌयक था। िनवेशकȗ को जोिखम से बचाने क े िलए Ģावधान करने की आवÌयकता थी, जो 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने इस िवधेयक क े अंतगर्त रखे ह
ȅ। इस संशोधन क े बाद पेटर्ोिलयम पिरचालनȗ 
एवं खनन पिरचालनȗ क े िलए सभी सरकारी िवभागȗ म
Ȃ जÊदी-जÊदी उनके  िलए अनुमित िमले, 
उनके  िलए परिमशन िमले, इसका Ģावधान इस िवधेयक क े अंदर िकया गया है। मȅ इसकी बहुत 
सराहना करता हूं, इसके  िलए सरकार को बधाई देता हूं और धन्यवाद करता हूं। …(समय की 
घंटी)… यह कानून तेल और गैस पिरयोजनाओं क े साथ-साथ … 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय महȂदर् भƺ जी, आपका समय खत्म हो गया है। 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ : 
सर, मȅ 1 िमनट मȂ खत्म कर रहा हूं। इस कानून क े बाद उǏिमयȗ क े बीच ĢितÎपधार् 
बढ़ेगी और िनिÌचत रूप  से बाजार मȂ माकȃ ट रेट भी कम होगा।  
 महोदय, सबसे बड़ी बात यह है, इस िवधेयक मȂ जो िवषय िनकल कर आया ह
ै, क्यȗिक 
अगर छोटे उǏमी भी आएंगे, Îवािमत्व क े साथ आएंगे, पाटर्नरिशप क े तहत आएंगे, तो दो या दो 
स
े अिधक पƺेधारकȗ क े साथ इसमȂ िनवेश करȂगे, यिद यह इस तरह से बढ़ेगा। …(समय की घंटी)…  
 
106
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ : महोदय , दंड ËयवÎथा िकसी भी क्षेतर् क े िलए िदक्कतȂ पैदा करती है। यह पहली बार 
हुआ है िक आजीवन कारावास को आिर्थक दंड क े रूप  मȂ बदला गया है।     
                                                                                  
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Ramji; not present.  Shri Sanjay Seth; you have five 
minutes.   
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ (उǄर Ģदेश) : सर, आपने मुझे The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Bill, 2024 पर अपने िवचार रखने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए म
ȅ बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद देता हूं। यह िवधेयक देश की ऊजार् सुरक्षा, आिर्थक Ģगित और आत्मिनभर्रता क े 
दृिÍटकोण से बहुत महत्वपूणर् है। तेल और गैस क्षेतर् का महत्व िकसी भी देश क े िवकास और 
अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ अित Ģमुख ह
ै। Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व मȂ हमारा 
देश इस क्षेतर् मȂ अभूतपूवर् Ģगित कर रहा है।  आज भारत िवÌव का चौथा सबसे बड़ा िरफाइनर बन 
चुका है।  2014 मȂ हमारी िरफाइिंनग क्षमता 215 िमिलयन मीिटर्क टन Ģित वषर् थी, जो अब 256 
िमिलयन मीिटर्क टन Ģित वषर् तक पहुंच गई है।  यह न क ेवल हमारी क्षम
ता का िवÎतार है, बिÊक 
ऊजार् आत्मिनभर्रता की िदशा मȂ बढ़ाया गया एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है। 
Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी की नीितयȗ ने द
ेश मȂ तेल और गैस क्षेतर् मȂ सिÅसडी को 85 परस Ȃट 
तक घटाने का काम िकया है।   2013 मȂ यह सिÅसडी 25 िबिलयन डॉलर थी, जो अब 3.5 िबिलयन 
डॉलर तक िसमट कर रह गई है।  इसके  अलावा पेटर्ोिलयम, तेल और िवटु िमन खिनज
ȗ से ĢाÃत 
तेलȗ क े िनयार्त मूÊय मȂ भी बहुत बढ़ोतरी हुई है।  2014 मȂ यह 60.84 िबिलयन थी, जो अब 84.96 
िबिलयन डॉलर तक पहुंच गई  है, जो वैिÌवक बाजार िहÎसेदारी का 12.5 परसȂट ह
ै।  भारत की 
तेजी से बढ़ती अथर्ËयवÎथा क े कारण ऊजार् की माँग लगातार बढ़ रही है।  आज यह माँग दोगुनी 
होकर होकर 1,123 िमिलयन टन तेल समतुÊय तक पहुंच जाएगी।  यह देश की िवकास की 
कहानी को बयां करता है। 
Îवतंतर्ता क े बाद से भारत ने कच्चे तेल क े उत्पादन मȂ उÊलेखन
ीय वृिǉ की है। यह मातर् 
0.26 िमिलयन टन से बढ़कर 30 िमिलयन  टन तक हो गया है, जो 10,000 परसȂट से भी अिधक 
की वृिǉ को दशार्ता है।  इसी तरह आज भारत 37 बीसीएम Ģाकृ ितक गैस का उत्पादन कर रहा 
है, लेिकन हमारी खपत की दर और भी अिधक ह
ै।  भारत मȂ पेटर्ोिलयम उत्पादȗ की खपत वतर्मान 
मȂ 230 िबिलयन  टन Ģित वषर् है।  खपत और उत्पादन क े बीच की खाई मȂ हमȂ आयात पर िनभर्र 
होना पड़ता है।  वतर्मान मȂ भारत की आयात िनभर्रता 85 परसȂट से अिधक है।  इसे काम
 करने क े 
िलए सरकार ने कई Ģभावी कदम उठाए हȅ।  
सरकार ने जैव ईंधन क े माध्यम स
े ऊजार् की उपलÅधता बढ़ाने क े कदम उठाए हȅ।  2014 मȂ 
जहाँ इथेनॉल की खरीद मातर् 38 करोड़ लीटर थी, वहीं 2024 मȂ यह 720 करोड़ लीटर तक पहुंच 
गई है।  इसका सीधा पिरणाम यह हुआ है िक लगभग एक लाख करोड़ रुपए  की िवदेशी मुदर्ा की 
बचत हुई है और 180 लाख मीिटर्क टन कच्चे तेल का आयात ĢितÎथािपत हुआ है।  यह ऊजार् 
आत्मिनभर्रता की िदशा मȂ हमारी सरकार का एक बड़ा योगदान है।   
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
107

सरकार की नीितयȗ क े कारण बायोगैस उत्पादन मȂ भी Ģितवषर् लगभग 15 िमिलयन  टन 
की वृिǉ हो रही है।  यह न क ेवल पिरवहन क्षेतर् क े Ģाकृ ितक गैस की खपत को पूरा करता है, 
बिÊक इसे काबर्नमुƪ बनाने मȂ भी मदद करता है।  इसके  अितिरƪ 25 करोड़ लीटर की एसएएफ 
पिरयोजनाएं कच्चे तेल पर आयात िनभर्रता को कम करने की महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा रही हȅ।   
हमारे देश
 मȂ 2004 से लेकर 2014 तक एक्सÃलोरेशन क े कायș मȂ कमी आई थी।  इस दौरान िकसी 
भी क्षेतर् को लाइसȂस नहीं िदया गया था, िजससे आयात की िनभर्रता बढ़ रही थी, लेिकन 2015 क े 
बाद से हमारी सरकार ने देश मȂ हाइडर्ोकाबर्न की खोज और उत्पादन को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए कई 
नीितगत सुधार िकए हȅ।  अपरÇपरागत हाइडर्ोकाबर्न संचा
लन की अनुमित और कम रॉयÊटी 
लगाने जैसे कदमȗ पर भी इस क्षेतर् को नई गित िमली है।  हमारी सरक
ार ने उत्पादन िहÎसेदारी 
...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : अब आपका समय खत्म हुआ।  
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ : सर, मȅ आिखरी अक्षर बोल देता हूँ, आिखरी पैरागर्ाफ बोल देता ह
 ूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप जÊदी बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ : ठीक  है, सर। महोदय, मȅ इस सदन मȂ भारत की ऊजार् सुरक्षा क े िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी 
मोदी जी की दूरदशीर् क ूटनीित और रूस  सिहत अन्य तेल उत्पादक देशȗ क े साथ सशƪ संबंधȗ 
पर Ģकाश डालना चाहता हूँ। 
  
Ǜी उपसभापित : अब नहीं। 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ : सर, बस
 दो िमनट।  बस इसे बोलने दीिजए। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : नहीं, नहीं।  धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ : हम सभी जानते हȅ िक वैिÌवक ऊजार् संकट और ... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़ क ंक्लूड।  
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ : सर, तनाव क े बीच मȂ हम लोगȗ ने रूस  क
े  साथ इतने अच्छे संबंध बनाए िक हमȂ 
वहाँ से बहुत ज्यादा तेल िमला।  साथ-ही-साथ ओपेक देशȗ क े साथ हमारी जो नीितयाँ रहीं, 
उससे भी हमȂ बहुत फायदा िमला है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद, धन्यवाद। 
 
108
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी संजय सेठ : सर, मȅ एक और छोटी-सी बात कह कर अपनी बात समाÃत करना चाहता हूँ।  
हमारे जो छोटे लघु उǏोग हȅ, अगर उनको गैस की सÃलाई बÊक रेट पर िमले, तो उनकी 
उत्पादन की जो कीमतȂ हȅ, वह कम हो जाएँगी।  इसके  साथ ही अगर इसमȂ लघु उǏोग क े साथ 
छोटे उǏोग भी जोड़ िदए जाएँगे, तो उनको भी इसका फायदा िमलेगा। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद।  माननीय Ǜी संजय िंसह जी,  पाँच िमनट। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह ( राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊ
ली) : मान्यवर, आपने इस महत्वपूणर् िबल पर मुझे 
अपनी बात कहने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपको धन्यवाद।  मान्यवर, अभी हमारे सǄा पक्ष क े 
िमतर्ȗ ने मोदी जी का भरपूर बखान िकया िक उन्हȗने यानी भारत क े Ģधानमंतर्ी ने तेल क
े  क्षेतर् मȂ, 
गैस क े क्षेतर् मȂ अनुकरणीय योगदान िदया है।  पूरी दुिनया उनका डंका पीट रहा है, ऐसा बताया 
जा रहा है।  लेिकन मुझे याद है िक जब 2014 मȂ ये लोग चुनाव Ģचार मȂ िनकले थे, तब कहते थे िक 
वोट दे दो, बीजेपी को िजता दो, डीजल 40 रुपए  Ģित लीटर हो जाएगा, पेटर्ोल 50 रुपए  Ģित 
लीटर हो जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  आपकी एक नेता
 का भाषण है, अगर वह सदन मȂ नहीं होगा, 
तो
 मȅ वह आपको भेज दूँगा, आप उसको सुन लीिजएगा।   
मान्यवर, उस समय दुिनया क े पैमाने पर कच्चे तेल का दाम क्या था? 135 डॉलर Ģित 
बैरल तक कच्चे तेल का दाम गया था, बावजूद इसके  न तो डीजल ने, न तो पेटर्ोल ने, िकसी ने 
सȂचुरी नहीं मारी, ल
ेिकन जब कोरोना क े समय मȂ कच्चे तेल का दम दुिनया क े पैमाने पर, 
अंतरराÍटर्ीय बाजार म
Ȃ 19 डॉलर Ģित बैरल हो गया था, उस वƪ भी िंहदुÎतान मȂ आपने महँगा 
डीजल बेचा, महँगा पेटर्ोल बेचा।  इस तरह से आपने उस समय भी डीजल और पेटर्ोल का दम कम 
नहीं िकया।  आपने इतना महंगा पेटर्ोल और डीजल बेचा िक तेल से इस द
ेश की जनता का तेल 
िनकाल िदया।  
सर, इस िबल का मकसद क्या है?  इसमȂ िलखा हुआ है िक आप इस क्षेतर् मȂ इन्वेÎटसर् को 
बूÎट करȂगे, अलग-अलग कॉरपोरेट घरानȗ को बढ़ावा दȂगे।  इस िबल का एक बड़ा मकसद यह भी 
है।  मान्यवर, जो ओएनजीसी है, िजसको 2023-24 मȂ 40,000 करोड़ रुपए का म
ुनाफा हुआ है, 
िजस क्षेतर् मȂ ओएनजीसी को, पिÅलक सेक्टर को, महारत्न क ंपिनयȗ को मुनाफा हो रहा है, वहाँ 
म
ुनाफा कमाने क े िलए आप और क ंपिनयȗ को लाना चाहते हȅ।  दूसरी बात यह है िक आप यह जो 
िबल ला रहे हȅ, इसके  माध्यम से आप राज्य सरकारȗ क े भी अिधकार छीन रहे हȅ और सारे 
अिधकार क ेन्दर् क े पास चाहते हȅ, िजससे संघीय ढाँचे पर भी चोट पहुँचेगी और राज्यȗ क े साथ 
आपका झगड़ा और बढ़ेगा।   यह बुिनयादी तौर पर फ ेडरल Îटर्क्चर क े भी िखलाफ है, िजसका 
िजकर् अभी बाकी साथी यहां पर कर रहे थ
े। 
मान्यवर, मȅ बड़ी िवनĦतापूवर्क पूछना चाहता हूँ िक आपने कहा िक पेटर्ोल का दाम कम 
होगा, डीजल का दाम कम होगा, लेिकन जो बीजेपी शािसत राज्य हȅ, मȅ उनमȂ से  दो-तीन राज्यȗ 
क
े  ही नाम पढ़ रहा हूँ।  च
ंडीगढ़ मȂ आज पेटर्ोल का दाम 100 रुपए  Ģित लीटर है, िबहार मȂ आज 
पेटर्ोल का दाम है 105 रुपए  Ģित लीटर है और िजस िदÊली की आप बार-बार आलोचना करते 
रहते हȅ, हर बात पर आलोचना करते रहते हȅ,  यहां पर पेटर्ोल का दाम है 94 रुपए  Ģित लीटर।  
िदÊली का म
ुख्यमंतर्ी रहते हुए अरिवन्द क ेजरीवाल जी ने िबजली ģी दी, पानी ģी िदया, िशक्षा 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
109

ģी दी, इलाज ģी िदया और महंगाई से लोगȗ को बचाने क े िलए पेटर्ोल और डीजल भी सÎते दामȗ 
पर िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर मȅ करÃशन पर बोलने लग जाऊँ गा, तो ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : संजय जी, क ृपया आप िवषय पर बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Nothing is going 
on record. ...(Interruptions)...  Sanjay Singhji, please speak on the subject. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सर, वे क्या बोल रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप इधर
 बोलȂगे िक उधर बोलȂगे? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : 
 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप सÅजेक्ट पर बोलȂ, वही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सर, मȅ सÅजेक्ट पर ही बोल रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : क्या मȅ आपको सÅजेक्ट याद िदला दूँ? आप oil exploration पर बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सर, मुझे बोलने दीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No please.  संजय जी, आप बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : यहां पर आपने मोदी जी का इतना बखान िकया, हमने उसको सुना।  आपको 
बोलने का मौ
का था, आपने बखान िकया,  लेिकन जब एक राज्य सरकार क े कामȗ का हम क ु छ 
उदाहरण देने लगते हȅ तो इससे तुरंत आपके  पेट मȂ ददर् होने लगता है।  अरिंवद क ेजरीवाल ने 
िबजली ģी दी, पानी ģी िदया, िशक्षा ģी दी, इलाज ģी िदया, सÎता पेटर्ोल, डीजल िदया। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record.
 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : मान्यवर, यह मुǈा है।  
 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
110
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी उपसभापित : अब आप खत्म कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : अब मȅ खत्म कर रहा हूँ, सर।  यह मुǈा है, क्यȗिक आपका ध्यान इस पर नहीं है 
िक देश मȂ डीजल क ै से सÎता हो, पेटर्ोल क ै से सÎता हो, बिÊक  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप सÅजेक्ट पर बोिलए। Nothing is going on record.  …(Time Bell 
rings)… 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सर, इन्हȗने यहां पीछे से कमȂट िकया, आपने सुना। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : नहीं, मȅने नहीं सुना। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : आपने सुना, सर। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : संजय जी, मȅ आपको सुन रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Nothing is going on record.  Your time is over.  Next 
speaker is Dr. V. Sivadasan. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Respected Deputy Chairman, Sir, this Bill is not for the 
people of the country.  It is for the corporate houses.  Sir, energy is very important for 
the development of a nation.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please let him speak.  …(Interruptions)…  
ितवाड़ी जी, आप लोग आपस मȂ क ृपया इस िवषय पर चचार् न करȂ।  …(Interruptions)… Let him 
speak. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN : Sir, affordable en ergy is very crucia l and essential.  
…(Interruptions)…  Sir, this is my time.  It is not the time of the Treasury Benches.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, please continue. 
 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
 Not recorded. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
111

DR. V. SIVADASAN: Affordable  energy is very crucial and essential for the welfare of 
the State. The democratically-elected Government should ensure the welfare of the 
common people. But, here the Government is walking in a very different direction. 
Sir, the Government is promoting privat isation of our great natural resources, 
including petroleum and natural gas. 
The aim of the big multinational companies is only to earn profit through 
production or distribution of PNG. The actual price and market price of petroleum 
products prove the correctness of this stat ement. Sir, the Government should not 
allow the exploitation of common people. Th e Government should control the price of 
petroleum products and it should restore and increase the subsidies. Sir, the price of 
petroleum products in our country is very high compared to global prices. The Union 
Government is imposing heavy taxes upon the petroleum products. In June 2008, the 
crude oil price touched US$202 per barrel.  At  that time, the petrol price in India was 
Rs.50 and diesel price was Rs.37. Sir, at that time, the present Ruling party was in 
the opposition and they raised this matter in front of the people. Now, the price of 
crude oil is only US$68 per barrel, which is  less than 30 per cent of the price in 2008. 
Even then, petrol is costing more than Rs.100 in India today. Sir, why is this 
happening? It is happening because of ex cessive taxes and surcharges levied by 
Central Government. The Central Government is imposing different surcharges on oil 
price. The Union Government collects a huge amount as tax.  In 2019-20, it was Rs. 
3.3 lakh crore; in 2020-21, it was Rs. 4.55 lakh crore, and, in 2021-22, it was Rs. 4.92 
lakh crore. Sir, now, the collected amount is above Rs.6 lakh crore. … (Time bell 
rings)… Sir, it should not be allowed. …( Time-bell rings)... I am concluding, Sir. The 
LPG refill cost was Rs. 410 for a 14.2-kilogram cylinder on March 1
st, 2014. It has now 
become Rs. 823 for a 14.2-kilogram LPG cy linder. The Government should protect 
the interests of the common people. ...(Time-bell rings)... They stand for the people 
and not for the corporate houses. Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Thank you, Dr. V. Sivadasan.  Now, Hon. 
Minister, Shri Hardeep Singh Puri, to reply to the discussion. 
  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I would like to thank all the hon. Members who 
have participated in this de bate. Many useful points have been raised. Some of the 
assertions made, I suspect, require a clarif ication because I belie ve, and I say this 
with all humility, that they are based on a selective read ing of the draft legislation 
before us. I would like to thank, in partic ular, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil, Shri Chunnilal 
Garasiya, Madam Dola Sen, Shri Elango, Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy, Shri 
112
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Manas Ranjan Mangaraj, Thiru Thambidura i, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, Dr. Kalpana 
Saini, Madam Fauzia Khan ji, Dr. Sikander Kumar, Shri P.P. Suneer, Shri Mahendra 
Bhatt, Shri Sanjay Seth, Shri Sanjay Singh and Dr. V. Sivadasan. Many of the points 
made by hon. Members have, in terms of nuance, also b een repeated by others. So, 
instead of responding to each of the points made by each speaker, I will take them in 
a broad category, and it will be my endeavou r to respond to all the points made. Sir, 
when I was introducing the am endment and the draft Bill, I had said, with all humility, 
that I want to do some context setting. The oil and gas sector, as I mentioned, is one 
that involves heavy investments and also ha s a long gestation period.  And it was not 
my intention nor did I ever suggest that no thing was done prior to 2014.  But I did 
suggest and I will say that more emphatically now that we allowed the eye to be taken 
off the ball and we paid the price for that. Now, lest this becomes a political debate, 
let me provide a context to what I said in terms of some annotation. Sir, the period 
between 2006 and 2014 is termed by all those who have even a nodding acquaintance 
with this sector of energy ‘the dull peri od’, and why, I will just give you some 
examples.  If any hon. Member wants to have it in more detail, I will be happy to send 
a detailed paper.  
During this period, many foreign companies, and I want to assure all the 
Members on the left spectrum of the House, my close friends, that this is not about 
handing over to the corporate sector, this is not about taking the powers of the States 
away. The petroleum mining leases will still have to be granted by the State 
Governments, no matter what changes are br ought by this.  We are not changing the 
Constitution. Now, what happened between 2006 and 2014? Italian major, Eni, left 
India E&P sector, as they were not allowe d to carry out operations in Rajasthan as 
well as in Andaman offshore. Australian company, BHP Billiton, relinquished their 
blocks in Mumbai offshore area which were expropriated by defence agencies. 
Another Australian company, Santos, was not allowed to work in Bengal offshore due 
to maritime border disputes with Bang ladesh. British gas and cairn group also 
relinquished their few blocks in KG and Mumb ai offshore due to restrictions imposed 
by the defence agencies. Sir, I had asserted  at the outset that this sector which 
involves heavy investment has about five major oil companies in the world, and almost 
all of them came here and we re driven away from the co untry. I am not saying that 
this was a wilful act. This was a natural consequence of the kind of policies we 
followed. One of the major challenges during this period was non-availability of drilling 
rigs. The Government introduced a rig holiday policy in 201 0 to allow moratorium from 
January 2008 to 31
st December 2010 for drilling of 31 ex ploration wells in deep water.  
No procurement of rigs or no import of rigs  was allowed.  Out of 3.5 million sq km of 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
113

sedimentary basin, one million sq km you cl osed.  It was a no-go area.  Nobody can 
enter there.  And in the remaining area, you put restrictions.  If the oil majors will not 
go away, what will they do?  They have not come here for philanthropy.  I just want to 
make it absolutely clear about the period before that.  I used a very polite term that we 
allowed the eye to be taken off the ball.  I can be a little more direct.  This was neglect 
of E&P.  This neglect was bordering on criminal neglect.  We are paying the price for 
it now.  Then came 2014.  That is when policies began to change.  That is when 
production sharing agreements gave way to revenue sharing agreements.  One of the 
most important things in the E&P sector is da ta.  No data is available.  If a foreign 
major comes and tries to drill here, you tell them, please come and spend your money 
and drill.  If they find oil after spending a lot of money -- sometimes a deep water well 
costs 100 million dollars -- yo u realise that this is your  sovereign asset.  Now you 
want to keep it.  You say, ‘Thank you very much’.  It is only in 2014 that things started 
changing.  My distinguished colleague know s that in 2015-16, We introduced major 
changes.  We introduced revenue sharing agreements.  Then a little later, we cleaned 
up one million sq km of the sedimentary basin which was a no- go area.  The hon. 
Member and some others also asked what is new in the Bill.  I just quickly reel off 
some points.  One is stability of lease.  Dispute resolution has been made much more 
objective and quick.  Definiti on of updation is there.  Single lease is there.  
Decriminalisation of provisions is there.  Penalty increment is there.  Sharing of 
infrastructure is there so that smaller pl ayers can take advantage.  Provisions like 
carbon capture and sequestration are there.  All these are new provisions in the Bill.   
 There are some points which have be en made, I suspect, on account of a 
selective or perhaps not a careful reading of the Bill.  Arbitration continues for 
disputes under lease and contracts.  Ad judication has only been introduced for 
violation of Acts and Rules which are framed  thereunder.  There is a saving clause 
which protects existing contracts and agreem ents as was pointed out.  A reference 
w a s  m a d e  t o  h e l i u m .   I  j u s t  w a n t  t o  p oint out that the hon. Member specifically 
r e f e r r e d  t o  h e l i u m .   I  w a n t  t o  s a y  t h a t  mineral oils mean an y naturally occurring 
hydrocarbon.  Helium is not a hydrocarbon but an elemental gas.  Nothing in this Act 
prohibits development of comprehensive energy projects under special scheme 
created with concerned Ministries such as the Department of Atomic Energy and the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences.  I think that poin t on  helium is, if I may be permitted to 
say, is a specious point.  Rules for sharing data, Director General of Hydrocarbons for 
better monitoring, sharing of infrastructure to enable small operators to make use of 
existing infrastructure and not make any unnecessary heavy investment in new 
114
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

infrastructure when infrastruc ture is already available, et c., are all new provisions in 
the Bill. 
A reference was also made to a CAG Report on Mumbai High.  I just wanted to 
say that precisely because of that Report.  I was talking about the recent period when 
the eye was taken off the ball.   It was about this dull pe riod between 2006 and 2014.  
The reference to Mumbai High was of, I thin k, 1974.  I joined the Foreign Service in 
1974.  Yes, they are producing.  Why are they producing 59 per cent of the existing 
resources?  Because we are using technology  and investment to put pressure into 
those wells to get more and more out of th ose wells.  I may also submit that in any 
discovered field, after the first year, production can decline by four per cent or even a 
little more. Over a period of time, the decline is much mo re. Precisely because of the 
CAG report and other information that we  got that we were able to utilize the 
technology investment in order to better and optimally utilise those fields.  
Sir, let me move on to some of the references which have been made to other 
energies here. But before I do that, I thin k Madam Dola Sen raised the point of our 
Strategic Petroleum Reserves being only enou gh to cover seven days of utilization. 
Deputy Chairman, Sir, I don't know where this fact is coming from. I know a little bit 
about Strategic Petroleum Reserves, SPRs. The reserve itself just now covers 72 
days. We are trying to take it up to the international norm. But, apart from that, we 
have a refining capacity today of something like 258.6 million metric tonnes per 
annum. We are taking it up to 310 million metric tonnes per annum. We have crude oil 
on our tankers, in the refineries, etc. So, I want to assure the hon. Member that these 
reserves that we are talking about are way above what is required should there be an 
emergency, and we have been able to navigate this quite well so far.  
Sir, I also want to now raise some issu es about import of energy. It was said 
that we are not diversifying; we are very de pendent. The facts are very different. The 
facts are that for many years, if you look at our imports in terms of source, they came 
from 27 countries. Today, they are coming  from 39 countries. And the world is 
changing. More hydrocarbons are being pr oduced in the Western Hemisphere. I am 
talking about Brazil; I am talking about Guyana; I am talking about Canada; I am 
talking about the United States. We import 20 billion dollars of energy from the United 
States. We consume, on an average, 5.4 million barrels of crude oil in a day. And as I 
submitted, that import is going to go up because our economy is growing at 6.5 per 
cent and energy is the driving force of GDP gr owth in many respects.  Earlier that five 
million barrels a day was to be equally divi ded between five or six suppliers -- Iraq, 
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and UAE.  But then the crisis took place; geopolitical turbulence 
took place in February, 2022. Suddenly, Russian oil became available at discounted 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
115

prices. Now, we don't take a decision in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas as 
to where we should import from. Our tr aders in the private sector, well-known 
companies and our oil marketing companies floa t tenders for import of oil at the point 
of importation. Wherever they get the crude from and the grade of crude that they are 
looking for, they will import from there. So, the availability from  one source because 
of the cheaper oil available has gone up. One hon. Member said that there were 
sanctions on Russian oil. I am not aware of any sanction. There was a perception 
sought to be built up by one part of the world. I won’t name them; we should not. 
...(Interruptions)... Well, Western Europe and other parts said that you should not 
buy from them. My colleague, the External Af fairs Minister, was travelling on a foreign 
trip and we had a chat before he left. I told  him if he had an opportunity to be asked, 
he may say that at that point of time they were buying more in one afternoon than we 
were buying in a quarter. And believe me, ev en today, there is Russian oil coming in 
through a pipeline to Hungary. It was coming  in; it is going to the Far East. So, the 
energy business, and the oil and gas busi ness is very complicated. The hon. Prime 
Minister has ensured availability. There was not a single instance in the last ten years 
when crude oil or petrol or diesel was not available. And it is affordable. I have a chart 
here which compares Indian prices with gl obal prices. In India, the price has come 
down over the last three years. Globally , it has gone up. Why? It is because the 
Central Government reduced excise duty and the BJP-ruled States brought down 
their VAT. Shri Sanjay Singh is not here. He  was talking about prices in Delhi. I want 
to remind him how it happened. In Delhi,  the prices were hi gher than in the 
neighbouring State. So, all my friends with big cars and big tanks used to go to 
Gurugram and other parts nearby Delhi, fill up and come back.  
So, the dealers realised that they we re being shortchanged because of the 
pricing. That is how it came down, not because of desire to provide the citizens of 
Delhi free or cheaper petr ol.  Sir, we were talk ing about other energies. पहले क्या हुआ 
था, आप उसे िमिनमाइज़ भी कीिजए। हम तो कभी करते ही नहीं हȅ।  सर, 2014 मȂ, let me talk 
about gas. Our gas production, I am talking about natural gas, is going up by 18 per 
cent every year.  It is going up by 18 per cent.  We are still dependent for 50 per cent. 
Again, I come to the same thing.  This has a long gestation period. If, in 2000, 2005 
and 2010, some far-sighted d ecisions had been taken, today we would not be in the 
situation of even having to import 50 per cent
. Just now, in a recent discovery, ONGC 
is producing, or going to produce very soon, 40,000 barrels a day off the Kakinada 
coast. I can give you many other examples.  Sir, let me come to cylinder gas.  Natural 
gas is as per definition of natural gas, bu t there is LPG which is a byproduct of work 
done in a refinery. Today, India is supplying  a cylinder of gas at the most economical 
116
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

price anywhere in the world.  In 2014, ther e were 14 crore connect ions of LPG.  And, 
connection of LPG means, एक पिरवार को एक कनेक्शन िमलता है और एक पिरवार मȂ चार-
पाँच लोग तो हȗगे। मान लीिजए, 14 करोड़ कनेक्शंस हȅ, आज वे बढ़कर 33 करोड़ हो गए हȅ। 14 
करोड़ से बढ़ते-बढ़ते 33 करोड़  हो गए हȅ, which means virtually the entire population is 
covered now through LPG.  And then, we ar e also introducing pi ped gas, which is 
about 25 per cent cheaper.  2014 मȂ 25 लाख कनेक्शंस थे, आज 1,25,00,000 हȅ। But, the 
issue is हम िकस दाम पर Ģोǹूस कर रहे हȅ। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने क्या िकया – जो  
उज्ज्वला योजना क े लाभाथीर् हȅ, उनमȂ एक पिरवार को एक िदन
 क े िलए कोई पाँच-छ: रुपय े मȂ 
क ुिंकग िमिडयम िमलता है और जो लाभाथीर् नहीं हȅ, जो नॉमर्ल िसलȂडर लेते हȅ, उन्हȂ 14-15 रुपय े 
मȂ िमलता है।  Sir, nowhere in the world, clean cook ing fuel being provided at this cost 
to the entire population of the country.  Sir, I can say this with complete...  
सर, हम  अब बायोÄयूÊस पर आते हȅ। 2014 
मȂ, देश मȂ टोटल बायोÄयूल ÅलȂिंडग 1.4 
परसȂट थी। इसके  िलए 2014 से पहले की सरकार ने बड़ी मेहनत की। हमने भी उसमȂ क ंटर्ीÅयूट 
िकया था। जब मȅ Ĥाजील मȂ पोÎटेड था, तब हमने कोिशश की िक हमारी दस Îटेट्स मȂ कम-से-
कम पाँच Ģितशत बायोÄयूल ÅलȂिंडग होनी चािहए, पर हम नहीं कर पाए, क्यȗिक ईक
ो-िसÎटम 
नहीं था। मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूँ िक िपछले महीने 16.9 परसȂट एथेनॉल बायोÄयूल ÅलȂिंडग 
हुई। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा है िक हमȂ 2030 तक 20 Ģितशत ÅलȂिंडग
 करनी है।  Sir, 
because of the success of 10 percent blending, we were able to bring down target of 
20 per cent from 2030 to 2025. मȅ दावे से कहता हूँ िक by the time we finish this, अक्टूबर, 
2025 तक हमारी 20 परस Ȃट एथेनॉल ÅलȂिंडग हो जाएगी। मेरे एक सीिनयर कलीग who looked 
afte
r this  portfolio  for seven years, सही  कह रहे हȅ। इसका इकोनॉिमक इÇपेक्ट क्या होगा?  
When we did 10 per cent blending , Sir, we saved Rs. 91,000 crores, और वह 91,000 
करोड़ हमारे िकसान भाइयȗ को गए हȅ। In fact, the urja has also contributed to our 
agricultural sector. जब हम बहुत जÊदी 20 Ģितशत ÅलȂिंडग करने जा रहे हȅ, This figure will 
be even higher.  Sir, green hydrogen is anot her story.  And, green hydrogen is fuel of 
the future.  Green hydrogen will succeed because India has both demand, it will have 
the production, and it will have the consumption.  हमारी क ंपनीज़ ने ऑलरेडी गर्ीन 
अमोिनया एक्सपोटर् कर िदए हȅ। अब सवाल यह उठता है िक Centre wants to usurp the 
power of the Stat
e? यह इस िबल मȂ कहाँ िलखा है? मȅने तो देखा, पर मुझे िमला नहीं। जब मȅ 
यह सुन रहा था, तो मȅने अपने सहयोिगयȗ को एक नोट भेजा िक आपने इस िबल मȂ ऐसा क ु छ तो 
नहीं िलखा है।  There is nothing in this Bill like th at.  We are changing the terminology. 
हम टिर्मनोलॉजी चȂज कर रहे हȅ।  यह 1948 का जो लेिजÎलेशन है, that was designed for 
minerals and metals.  In 1957, we
 created a separate Bill for minerals and metals, पर 
यह अब भी उसी मȂ आ रहा है। So, we need to change the terminology. मȅने आपको नई चीज़ 
क े बारे म
Ȃ बताया, ईज़ ऑफ िबजनेस क े बारे मȂ बताया। Sir, through you, I want to assure this 
House.  The fact that we have already taken steps, 2016 मȂ production sharing, 
revenue sharing contracts, हमने एक िमिलयन Îक्वायर िकलोमीटर ओपन िकया है। अभी हम 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
117

जो चȂज करने जा रहे हȅ, हमारे ओएएलपी मȂ 9th राउंड मȂ 38 Ģितशत जो िबड्स आई हȅ they 
came in that one million square kilometers which was opened up in 2022. This Bill, 
once it is enacted into law, will ensure that investor will have more confidence to 
come here. Unlike the dull pe riod between 2006 and 2014, जब वे आए तो उनका 
expropriate कर िलया या क ु छ और कर िलया, ये चीज़Ȃ नहीं हȗगी। एक ही लीज़ होगी, एक ही 
लाइसȂस होगा और अगर dispute हुआ, तो उसको मैनेज करने क े िलए भी there will be 
predictability and stability. Sir, I could go on for another half an hour to raise the other 
points. I think I have covered the main points and I have made a careful note that after 
this Bill is passed by this House and Lok Sabh a, I will be personally writing letters to 
each of the Members who have raised the othe r issues so that there is no doubt. The 
Government has nothing to hide on this. Th is is a win-win legislation for the States. 
One issue was raised just now. मȅ उसका आन्सर िडटेल मȂ देना चाहूंगा िक ऑयल इ
ंिडया ने 
एक compensation नहीं िदया, there was some fire somewhere. I want to assure you 
that a total of Rs. 102.74 crores was paid to the affected familie s and even to those 
who were not directly affected, when we we re told that there has been some flooding 
in the fields, etc. another Rs. 52 lakhs were  deposited. Sir, all this boogie which is 
being raised by the environmental assessmen t, land and people being compensated, 
सर, यह तो Îटेट गवनर्मȂट की responsibility है। ओएनजीसी ने 2018 क े आसपास एक Îटेट मȂ 
क ु छ िडÎकवरीज़ कीं। अगर चाहो, तो मȅ नाम भी ले लूंगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... West Bengal मȂ 
िडÎकवरीज़ की गईं।  ...(
Ëयवधान)... आप सुन लीिजए।  एक मेÇबर ने पूछा, तो मȅ उसी का 
जवाब दे रहा हूं।  उस समय जब उन्हȗने िडÎकवरी की, उस समय 5 Îक्वेयर िकलोमीटर का 
एिरया था।  उन्हȗने बड़ी िचिƻयां िलखी हȅ।  यह बात नॉथर् ईÎटनर् जोनल काउंिसल मȂ भी आई।  
उन्हȗने उसके  बाद तीन िडÎकवरीज़ और कर ली हȅ और िडÎकवरी का जो एिरया है, वह 5 
Îक्वेयर िकलोमीटर की जगह 99 Îक्वेयर िकलोम
ीटर चला गया।  अब वहां से जो क्वेरी आती है, 
वह displacement क े बारे मȂ होती है।  यह तो
 आपको करना है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िसफर् यह 
कहना चाहूंगा िक अगर इसको िकसी भी Îटेट ने इिÇÃलमȂट नहीं िकया, तो they stand to lose 
something like Rs. 7000 to Rs. 8000 crores . The money would belong to the State 
Governments in terms of revenue and in term s of equity. They are losing the money. 
So, I want to assure everyone that this legislation changes the terminology. It brings in 
predictability, stability and there is no atte mpt to reward any big person. This is a 
national asset and I think, if we do not exploit the national asset now because our 
energy needs are such, there may come a time , after ten or fift
een years, when there 
will be a lid put on all fossil fuel utilization,  when only green energy can be used. I am 
confident, Sir, in India, we need fossil fu els, I think, for another twenty years. My 
senior colleague can correct me . But we need to bring this legislation here in order to 
provide a win-win confidence not only to ou r own operators, but also to the foreign 
118
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

investors so that they can come and do business here with a view to benefitting 
everyone. I thank you, Sir, I commend the Bill for adoption.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the question is: 
“That the Bill further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 
1948, be taken into consideration”.  
The motion was adopted. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration o f 
the Bill. 
Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, in Clause 3, there is  one Amendment (No.1) by Dr. 
John Brittas.  Are you moving?   
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala):   Sir, I move: 
1. That at page 2, after line 25, the following be inserted, namely:–
“(c)
   after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:–
“Provided that no petroleum lease shall be granted except by
adoptinga method of auction by giving wide publicity so that all eligible
persons may participate in the process ensuring fairness and non-
arbitrariness.”
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  N o w ,  i n  C l a u s e  5 ,  t h e re are eleven Amendments; 
Amendments (Nos. 2 to 10) by Dr. John Bri ttas; Amendment (No. 11) by Shri A.A. 
Rahim; Amendment (No. 14) by Dr. V. Siva dasan. Dr. John Brittas, are you moving 
your Amendments?  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
119

DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala):   Sir, I move: 
2. That at page 2, line 41, the words “or extension or renewal”, be deleted.
3. That at page 2, line 42, the words “or extension or renewal”, be deleted.
4. That at page 2, line 47, the words “or extended or renewed”, be deleted.
5. That at page 3, line 4, the words “or extended or renewed”, be deleted.
6. That at page 3, line 5, after the words “petroleum leases”, the words “in respect
of contiguous areas”, be inserted.
7. That at page 3, line 13, for the words “any law”, the words “the law of the land”,
be substituted.
8. That at page 3, line 14, the words “or outside India”, be deleted.
9. That at page 3, lines 15 to 17, be deleted.
10. That at page 3, lines 22 and 23, the words “to the disadvantage of the lessee ”,
be deleted.
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, Amendment (No. 11) Shri A.A. Rahim, are you 
moving?  
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala):   Sir, I move: 
11. That at page 3, after line 23, the following be inserted, namely, –
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 40 percent. of
the revenues generated from petroleum leases shall be allocated to
the respective State Government wh ere the operations under such
leases occur.”
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Amendment (No.14) by Dr. V.  Sivadasan.    Hon. 
Member not present. Amendment not moved. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I shall now put th e Amendments (Nos.2 to 10) moved by 
Dr. John Brittas to Vote. 
The motion was negatived. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   I shall now pu t the Amendment (No.11) moved by Shri 
A.A. Rahim to vote. 
120
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

The motion was negatived. 
Clause 5 was added to the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Now, in Clause 6, there are three Amendments; 
Amendments (No. 12 and 13) by Shri A.A.  Rahim; and Amendment (No. 15) by Dr. 
V. Sivadasan. Shri A.A. Rahim, are you moving the Amendments?
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Sir, I move: 
12. That at page 4, after line 19, the following be inserted, namely,–
"
(mm) the obligation of every lessee to undertake the restoration,
decommissioning, and site remediation of the oilfield upon cessation of operations
in accordance with the standards prescrib ed by the Central Government, and the
penalties for failure to comply, which shal l be punishable under section 9 of this
Act."
13. That at page 4, after line 29, the following be inserted, namely, –
“(pp) the penalties for the offence of non-compliance with the emission reduction
targets notified by the Central Government under section 9 of this Act.”
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   Dr. V. Sivadasan, are you moving the Amendment?
Hon. Member not present.   I shall now put the Amendments (Nos. 12 and 13) moved
by Shri A.A. Rahim to vote.
The motions were negatived. 
Clause 6 was added to the Bill.  
Clauses 7 to 12 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula, and the Title were added to the Bill.  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI:   Sir, I move: 
That the Bill be passed. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, we shall take up the Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 
2024.  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
121

Shri Kinjarapu Rammo
han Naidu to move a mo tion for consideration of the Bharatiya 
Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024.  
The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHR I KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU): Sir, I 
move: 
“That the Bill to provide for regulation and control of the design, manufacture, 
maintenance, possession, use, operation, sale , export and import of aircraft and for 
matter connected therewith or incidental th ereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken 
into consideration.” 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for giving me opportunity to 
introduce this Bill.  In fact, this Bill ha d been passed by the Lok Sabha in the last 
session with a lot of good faith and a positi ve energy.  And, I bring it with the same 
kind of energy to the Rajya Sabha and I expect the same kind of support and 
cooperation from all the hon. Members here.   I would like to go a little bit into the 
brief of the whole Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak , the Bill that we are bringing here.  If 
you look at civil aviation and how it started in India, in 1911 the first Indian Aircraft Act 
was brought in the pre-Independence era by the British and at that time the whole 
airspace was being monitored by this Indian  Aircraft Act.  In 1919, there was an 
International Convention for Regulation of Aerial Navigation.  Once that Convention 
was done among 27 countries, including India,  at that time, there was a requirement 
for us to amend our Act a little bit.  Once that convention was done in 1919, another 
Act was brought in which was the Indian Airc raft Act in 1934 which took into account 
all the discussions that happened during th at Convention. After that, in 1944, there 
was the Chicago Convention and the Chicag o Convention promulgated another body 
which was the International Civil Aviation Organisation that became the premier body 
which is still existent till now and it consists of 193 member States. These 193 member 
States cooperate together and share their skies to their mutual benefit, promoting 
sustainable growth and socio-economic prospe rity wherever these aircrafts fly.  So, 
right now, the International Civil Aviation Or ganisation is the body which suggests all 
the member countries on how to regulate  airspaces, how to cooperate with each 
other and how to navigate from one pla ce to another.  These are some of the 
recommendations based on discussion with  these 193 countries; they do it. While 
these discussions happen, they keep recommending all the 193 member countries. In 
122
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

our country, right from 1934, when the existi ng Act originated, it has already been 90 
years. In these 90 years, the Act has been  amended 19 times --  19 new Sections 
came into place and 2 Sections were repealed .  So, a total of 21 times the Act has 
been amended.  While the process of doing all these amendm ents, whenever an 
Amendment came in, everything was put in bits and pieces into the Act. Now what 
did it lead to? There are a lot of redundanci es, a lot of inconsistency and a lot of dis-
organisation happened within the original Act itself. Now the International Civil 
Aviation Organisation, which keeps auditi ng all the requirements, all the rules, 
regulations and the Acts that any country has, has recommended to India that why 
don't you look at your principal legislation once because there are a lot of activities 
and a lot of inconsistencies happening; why do n't you come up again so that there is 
no redundancy happening in the principal Ac t itself? And, Sir, that becomes the base 
for us to bring this new Amendment -- Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak .  While we are 
bringing this Bill, what we have done here is that we have organised everything. Now, 
under the Indian civil aviation, we have certain bodies.  We have DGCA, which is the 
Director General of Civil Aviation. We have  the BCAS, which is the Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security. We have th e AAIB -- Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau -- and 
there is Central Government also which makes its own legislations regarding the civil 
aviation. So, if you look at the new Bill that we have brough t in, there are clear 
sections made for powers of each of these bodies.  So, there is a clear demarcation 
and a clear indication on what each body ha s to do and we have entirely organised 
whatever was there in the earlier Act and we have totally or ganised it and presented it 
in a much better manner which the ICAO also  recommended to us in this. On top of 
that, as we are talking about civil aviati on, I would like to present the House with 
some of the statistics also on how the growth  has happened in civil aviation in the last 
10 years. ...(Interruptions)... I will talk about each and ev ery issue regarding the civil 
aviation.  I am willing to discuss on it but I will keep my purview within the Bill in the 
beginning.  After Narendra Modi ji has become the Prime Minister of this country, you 
would have heard him constantly saying about civil aviation.  When he talks about the 
country’s growth, he wants the Indian civil av iation also to assist the growth of the 
country and airports reached to a staggering number.  We had 74 airports in 2014. 
No other country in the world has achieved this kind of success where we have 
doubled from 74 to almost 157 airports in the country.  This is a huge and staggering 
number which also surprised the best of the countries in the world. And, if you look at 
the domestic air passenger traffic, which wa s 67 million in 2014, it is 153 million right 
now, which is also more than double.   Then , the number of aircraft that were there, 
that is, the fleet size, it used to be 400 in  2014, and now in 10 years, we have brought 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
123

it to 813.  We have doubled this also.  There are many other aspects which have 
doubled, which have improved. ...(Interruptions)...  I will talk about it.   Airfares have 
not doubled.  I can say that much right now and I will talk about it also. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas, please. 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  Regarding the growth of civil aviation, I have 
presented some of the main basic statistics which give us a look into the industry on 
how it has improved.  But, toda y, we are seeing civil aviation not just on the basis of 
these numbers.  We are not saying that when  we talk about aviation, it is how many 
airports we have, how many passengers we are increasing.  We want to deep dive 
into this aspect.  The growth  that we have observed is just the tip of the iceberg and 
we believe civil aviation has a lot of po tential to drive the economy of the whole 
country. We are looking at the MRO sector.  We are looking at how to build our own 
aircraft here.  We are looking at how to skill our own people so that they don't need to 
go abroad and come back and work in the civil aviation industry here.  We are looking 
at bringing in more expertise into the industry, let it be in terms of production, let it be 
in terms of manufacturing, and that is why,  one of the principal things that we are 
bringing in this new Act, is the defi nition for ‘design’, ‘maintenance’ and 
‘manufacture’.   In the earlier Act, the Indian Aircraft Act, only the word ‘maintenance’ 
was mentioned, and even in that, there was no definition for it.  But now, we are 
adding in  ‘design’ and we are adding in ‘manufacture’ also, and we are thoroughly 
defining all these three terms which are very important for the Indian aviation industry 
to go forward.  Now, how will these definitions help?  When the ICAO looks at all 
these countries on who is going to manufacture aeroplanes, it looks at how it is being 
backed up by the legislations in that country.  Till now, if we say that we are trying to 
manufacture our own plane, we don't have any legislation which defines, as such, 
that what is the design of an aircraft, what are the aspects related to the airworthiness 
of an aircraft, what should be the type ce rtification of the aircraft and whether the 
country is ready to do that or not.  But no w, under the leadership of Narendra Modiji, 
we are strongly saying that India is at a stage where it can design, manufacture and 
maintain its own aircraft, and that is the dire ction in which we want to level up and go 
forward in the civil aviation industry. If you look at many more other statistics that I 
have, it shows that there is a huge potential in this country, and right now, we are 
moving forward in that direction.   As we add these definition of ‘design’, we are 
making India as a state of design, making  India as a state of manufacture, making 
124
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

India as a state of maintenance, we see that there is a huge potential to create 
economic activity and especially job creati on.  The International Civil Aviation 
Organisation (ICAO) and many other international bodies have all come out with one 
figure, the multiplier effect.  One job that you want to create in the civil aviation 
industry, it leads to ultimately creating 6.7 times the number of jobs.  So, the kind of 
effect the civil aviation has in job creation or  economic activity is very, very huge.  So, 
we have to tap this potential and this new Ac t, that we are bringing, helps us well into 
that direction.   
Other than that, as I have said, we ha ve organised the whole Sections in the 
earlier Act itself.   So, there is a clear picture.  Now, if you want to look at what are 
the actions of DGCA, then we thoroughly know what are the po w ers  o f  D G C A and 
how the powers of the Central Government should be in terms of civil aviation.  
Everything is listed properly.  On the top of that, if you look at the consultations, wide 
number of consultations have happened with the public, with the DGCA, with the 
Airports Authority of India (AAI), all the important stakeholders like BCAS and all the 
other Ministries that are concerned.  Af ter thorough consultations with all these 
Ministries, we have compiled everything.  We have taken the good suggestions and 
we have tried to bring it into the principal Act now.  
Then, I will talk about some of the important features that we are bringing into 
the Bill.   Now, almost thousands of pilots are getting trained in this country today and 
we have spoken to them.  We have asked them about any challenges right now in the 
present scenario.  At present, there are 800 aircraft in the country, and you would be 
surprised that the number of aircraft orde rs, that are coming in, are more than 1500 
right now, and I keep talking to these air lines and they say that every month, they 
have ordered 50 more, they have ordered 100 more becau se they see the potential 
that India has today and how we have to grow forward also. As we bring in these new 
planes into the market, we would need more pilots also. On some situations, with all 
the FDTL limitations that th ey have, all the operational requirements they have, one 
aircraft would require up to 20 pilots. So, imagine how many pilots our country would 
need as we move forward with all this fleet  coming into the country.  We thought that 
we should talk to them, know what their challenges are and see as to how the whole 
pilot training industry is working today. An d one important thing that they mentioned 
is, while they go for this CPL, Commercial Pilot Licence training and all, one challenge 
that they face is that they have to obtain  the Radio Telephony Certificate, which is 
technically called the RTR certificate, an d the Flight Radio Telephone Operator’s 
licence.  These are two things that they have to obtain and for that they have to go to 
the Department of Telecom. This was ho w it was designed because they had the 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
125

equipment, they had the little know-how and technical expertise.  So, they had 
divided this stuff. They said, “Why don't you get this licence from the Department of 
Telecom?” Once that comes from there, then the DGCA, which is with the Civil 
Aviation, thoroughly verifies that, and, on ce we do the cross-verification and the CPL 
licence also, then we grant p ilot the licence.  But we have seen that when we do this 
dual thing of going to that department and obtaining a licence and our department 
doing a certain verification, there was a lo t of delay happening, there was a lot of 
inconvenience for pilots and we know some times the systems kind  o f  m i s u s e  t h i s  
power when they have the additional authorit y to come in between on how it can lead 
to certain other challenges for the pilots  also. And now we have a lot of young 
population who wants to aspire to become  a pilot, who dream to become a pilot, 
and, we do not want them to see these kind of challenges happening in the system. 
So, what we thought is: When we have so  much expertise right now with the DGCA, 
why don't we do the RTR licence and certificat es within our system itself? That is the 
biggest change we have brought in here.  As  we have the expertise, we are bringing 
everything under our wing, under our Civ il Aviation, under our DGCA, and we are 
letting the pilots not go through the inconv enient process of going to two different 
departments for obtaining their pilot licen ce. And other than that, Sir, we have 
brought in the appeal system.  Like I have  said, we have amended the Act 21 times. 
While we have done that, sometimes we ha ve missed putting some rules.  Sir, the 
International Civil Aviation Organizations keep recommending us so many things, time 
and again, because it has an international view to this.  Sky is not limited to one 
country. We travel from one country to the other country. So, everything has to be 
harmonized.  If you are flying here in India, if you are flying in New Zealand, if you are 
flying in America or any other region or any other continent, everything has to be 
harmonized so that there is a smooth travel between the countries happening.  So, as 
and when anything happens anywhere in  the world, ICAO picks it up and 
recommends to all countries why they do not have a uniform harmonization among 
the laws on this.  So, it keeps doing it all the time. It meets every year multiple times 
on multiple subjects and once they re ach a consensus in Montreal where the 
headquarters is, they keep sending the recommendations to all the countries.  As we 
keep doing it, it is important for us also to follow the ICAO recommendations. 
Whenever we keep doing it, not many a time we can bring all the changes to the 
Parliament and say let us amend the principa l Act itself.  Many times what we do is, 
we try to keep changing the Rules, which are framed under the principal Act.  Now, 
constantly after doing that time and again, ICAO also observed that there is no 
principal legislation backing to the rules th at we have today. So, it is very, very 
126
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

important for us to have the backing in the principal legislation itself, so that whenever 
we make the rules, if someone asks abou t the legal sanctity, we can point it out 
specifically in the Act itself. So that process we have adhered to this time. So, 
whatever rules we are making, we thoroughly understand that the rules are originating 
from so-and-so clause or so-and-so section in the principal act itself.  Some 
problem that we faced earlier was that th ere was no appeal system. Whenever the 
Civil Aviation, the Central Government or one of our bodies issues any of these 
administrative orders or when actions are ta ken by the department itself, they do not 
have the principal backing. We are doing it  under rules, which is also not correct 
legally.  So, right now, we have put an ap peal system which follows the principle of 
natural justice in the Act itself. So, that is a strong legal backing that we are giving. 
And now anyone who faces any administrative order or an y other financial economic 
order that comes from the Ministry itself, he can go through the process of appeal 
and ask as to why did it come against me? So, the principle of natural justice is being 
followed here. And on top of that, there are some other provisions also in the appeal 
system. Also, when we had any problem wi th the pilot or the license, earlier the 
system was that you could only cancel the license.  But we observed that not every 
time you can cancel the license.  Sometimes you might need to restrict it; sometimes 
you might want to cancel it.  So, in this kind of system, we observed the small flaws 
that were existing in the industry.  We tried to pick them up and include them in the 
Act itself.  These are some of the changes that we brought in.  Sir, I am willing to 
listen to the hon. Members.  I will talk about the other issues once I get all the 
suggestions and comments from the hon. Me mbers, and I am willing to answer each 
and every clarification that I need to give from this.  But I request the support and also 
the cooperation of all the Memb ers here.  This is a very im portant legislation that we 
are doing because we realized that civil aviation is the third biggest domestic sector in 
the whole world.  Considering the populati on, in U.S., it may be around 35 crores 
today, and it is their number one domestic  market.  Look at our population, and we 
want more people to travel through air here which is becoming a reality also under the 
leadership of Narendra Modiji.  He ha s brought in the UDAN Scheme.  Everyone 
should know about this UDAN Scheme. You would all wonder that we have created 
so many airports.  See, creating airports is one challenge.  You can spend the capex 
and you can create an airport.   But today, with the private airlines, for them to run 
those routes is another bigger challenge.  But our Prime Minister is a man with a 
vision; he is a man on a mission.  In  2017, he launched the UDAN Scheme, ‘ उड़े देश 
का आम नागिरक’, which was very, very specific to connect these under-served and 
unserved airports of the country.  He did not want them to lie vacant or lie dormant.  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
127

He thought of a brilliant scheme where we were giving a small BGF funding.  We 
called in the airlines and said , “This is the real India that  we want to connect and, 
through UDAN, why don't you start the routes wherever these new airports were 
there which were built in many of the unconnected areas, which were unconnected 
through air travel? ” Today, a staggering number of 602 routes have been started by 
UDAN in the last seven years which is a record  in itself, and we want to push it more 
also.  We want to create more airports and we want to use the UDAN even more.  I 
can proudly say today that I was a Member of Parliament for the last 10 years and 
initially, as I started as a Member, the mo st important request I would get from my 
constituents was to get a new railway stop. I believe, it is there today also. But, as a 
Minister today, in five months, I am getting requests from across the table, across the 
House, both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, people are saying for more air connectivity.  
They are saying why don't you connect me from point A to point B, why don't I get an 
airport.  These are the remote places wher e people would have not even dreamt of 
having an airport but today our India, my In dia, has become so aspirational that even 
in the remotest parts, they are saying that I am not going to strive for anything less.  I 
think our hon. Member has also requested he re, Sir.  They are a ll requesting as to 
why I do not have an airport in my own distri ct itself.  I feel proud of that, that today 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please, Mr. John Brittas.   Please don't interrupt.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  Sir, I am willing to answer all those 
questions.  I am saying, today, India has become so aspirational that everyone is 
dreaming and aspiring to have their own airpor t.  We want to cater to those dreams.  
We want to build those airports because we f eel if we can't do it today, it will become 
a challenge tomorrow.  Tomorrow, the land is going to be a scarcity.  Everyone wants 
to have land and nobody is parting away with their land also.  Tomorrow, it might get 
even more difficult.  For one airport, if we want to cater for big, wider aircraft, we 
need at least 1000 acres land.  If we don't start today, it will be very difficult to do 
tomorrow.  That is why it is very important to build this infrastruc ture now.  Our hon. 
Prime Minister has taken it at the right time  and we have made consistent progress.  
But we believe that there is a lot more to ach ieve for us in civil aviation.  With the help 
of this Act, we are going to move into th at direction and we will collectively achieve 
what I am saying today.  We will be the num ber one domestic civil aviation market in 
128
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

the whole world.  We are going to achieve  this target. With these comments, I would 
like to open the Bill for discussion.  Thank you, Sir.     
The question was proposed. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The motion has been moved. I now call upon the 
Members whose names have been received fo r participation in the discussion.  Dr. 
Syed Naseer Hussain. 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN (Karnataka):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, for 
allowing me to speak on the Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024.  I am finding it 
difficult even to pronounce the words.  I don’t know why the Government is using 
Hindi names in English script.  The name shou ld reflect the contents of the Bill.  It 
should be easily understandable and accessible to everyone.  
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair.] 
 In fact, nearly 60 per cent of India’s popula tion is non-Hindi speaking.  By doing this, 
you are depriving, at the very  threshold, the majority of country’s population.  They 
will find it difficult to comprehend what is there in the Bill.  This is an exclusionary 
trend.  It is excluding others.  It should actually try and see that everyone is included 
while naming the Bill itself.  I want to put this on record.  The same Bill when it came 
in 1934 was called the Aircraft  Act, 1934.  In Hindi, it was called Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 
1934.  Why don’t we name the Bill both in Hindi and English?  I think this is an 
exclusionary tactic.  We should do away with this.   
Now I come to the contents of the Bill.  This Bill broadly provides for 
manufacture, maintenance, safety, streamli ning operations and establishment of 
regulatory bodies which give broader powe rs to the Union Gove rnment.  This Bill 
retains the regulatory structure and most pr ovisions of the previous Act of 1934 and 
subsequent amendments thereto.  The agencies, including the DGCA, the BCAS and 
the AAIB are not new agencies.  They exist right now.  However, the main question 
arises how much independence and autonomy  would such agencies have given the 
Government’s tendency of centralizing everyt hing.  It is a matter of grave concern. 
The Bill adds that appeals against an orde r of the DGCA or the BCAS will lie before 
the Union Government.  No further appeals will be allowed against the order of the 
Union Government.  It remains to be s een how professionally and independently 
would such agencies be able to function while being under the direct control of the 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
129

Union Government.  There is also a need to include provisions for establishing 
independent regulatory bodies with th e mandate of ensuring compliance and 
investigating incidents thus facilitating in dependent oversight mechanism.  Aviation 
सेÄटी क े बारे मȂ देखȂगे, तो जनवरी, 2024 मȂ revised Flight Duty Time Limitation (FDTL) 
रेग्युलेशन लाए गए  थे for increased rest period for pilots, to redefine night duties and so 
on.   लेिकन माचर्, 2024 मȂ ही airline क ंपनीज क े Ģैशर मȂ आकर सरकार ने इन रेग्युलेशन्स को 
indefinitely delay कर िदया।  आज तक वे रेग्युलेशन्स लाए नहीं गए और न ही लागू िकए गए हȅ।  
In section 2, there is a need to incorpor ate provisions specifically for drones and 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) owing to their unique oper
ational risks and 
regulatory needs.  Further,  provisions may be incorporated which facilitate use of 
sustainable aviation fuels, green t echnologies and practices that reduce 
environmental impact of aviation.   मȅ सरकार से गुजािरश करना चाहता हूं िक िडजी यातर्ा 
िसÎटम मȂ जो facial recognition related pr ivacy and surveillance issues आ रहे हȅ, उन पर 
ध्यान देना चािहए।  इसके  साथ ही consumer protection क े िलए appropriate measures लेने 
चािहए।  Further, a dispute resolution framew ork needs to be worked out between 
airlines and passengers and other stakeholders.  Other than substantive provisions of
 
the Bills, there are other issu es in the sector that need to be addressed and also 
challenges that need to be met.  In the past, Governments were more interested in 
actual development and development for the masses.   इस संदभर् मȂ मȅ आपको याद 
िदलाना चाहता हूं िक नेहरू  जी क े टाइम पर, इंिदरा जी क े टाइम पर, मनमोहन िंसह जी क े 
टाइम पर और दूसरी जो सरकारȂ थीं, उनके  टाइम पर जो काम िकए गए थे, चाहे वे डैÇस हो, 
हाइवेज़ हȗ, िĤजेज़ हȗ, हॉिÎपटÊस हȗ, इन्ģाÎटर्क्चर Ģोजेक्ट्स हȗ, वे आज तक कायम हȅ। 
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
आज तक उनकी कोई िशकायत नहीं आई। वहाँ क्वांिटटी क े साथ-साथ क्वािलटी पर भी ध्यान 
िदया जाता था, लेिकन आज यह सरकार
 अपने नंबर बढ़ाने मȂ, फीता काटने मȂ और मोदी जी की 
इमेज चमकाने मȂ ज्यादा इंटरेिÎटड है, इसीिलए िंहदुÎतान का आज यह हाल है। ये जहाँ-जहाँ 
हाथ रख द
ेते हȅ, फीता काट कर आते हȅ, वहाँ सब िगरना चालू हो जाता है। सर, एयरपोट्सर् भी 
िगरते हȅ! आप िदÊली का एयरपोटर् देख लीिजए। राजकोट एयरपोटर्, लखनऊ एयरपोटर्, जबलपुर 
एयरपोटर्, इन सभी जगहȗ पर सेÄटी िरलेटेड इंिसडȂट्स हुऎ हȅ। यह मंतर्ालय ऐसा मंतर्ालय हो 
गया है िक इसका अपना क ु छ है ही नहीं। न तो इस मंतर्ालय क े पास एयरपोटर् है और न ही इस 
मंतर्ालय क े पास एयरकर्ाÄट है। िसफर् मंतर्ी हमारे हȅ और वे भी तेलुगू Îपीिंकग हȅ। सर, िसफर् एक 
मंतर्ी बचे हुए हȅ वरना न तो एयरपोटर् है और न ही एयरकर्ाÄट है।  
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
 
130
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

सर, आज िसफर् दो क ंपिनयȗ का एयरलाइन सेक्टर पर कÅजा है। In the country, 
airports have increased, air traffic has in creased, however, the prices have also 
continuously increased.  Government  is allowing  private airline to £ money from the 
pocket of poor man.  सर , मोदी जी क्या कहते थे? जो हवाई चÃपल पहनकर घूमता है, वह 
हवाई जहाज मȂ िदखाई देना चािहए – यह  मेरा सपना है। क्या हुआ? क्या हुआ इन बड़ी-बड़ी 
बातȗ का?  सर, आज यह हालत है िक िकसी भी एयरलाइन मȂ 20,000 से 30,000 रुपय े से कम मȂ 
िटकट नहीं िमलती है। आज यह िटकट 50,000, 70,000 से लेकर 1,00,000 रुपय े तक भी जा 
रही है। हवाई चÃपल पहन
ने वाले हवाई जहाज मȂ िकस तरह घूम पाएंगे - सरकार हमȂ यह बताएं?   
सर 'उड़ान Îकीम' का क्या हुआ? हवाई चÃपल वाले तो भूल जाएं, क्यȗिक उड़ान क े रेट्स 
मȂ 200 परसȂट का इंकर्ीज हुआ है। उड़ान क े रूट्स पर जो Ģाइसेस हȅ, वे 200 परसȂट स
े ज्यादा बढ़े 
हुए हȅ। आज मंतर्ी जी 'उड़ान Îकीम' की बात कर रहे थे, लेिकन 50% से ज्यादा रूट  ऑपरेशनल 
नहीं हȅ। सरकार ने कहा है िक उड़ान क े अंदर 74 एयरपोट्सर् ऑपरेशनल हुए हȅ, लेिकन सच्चाई 
यह है िक िसफर् 11 एयरपोट्सर् Îकर्ै च से बनाए गए हȅ।  इसिलए मȅ इनसे पूछना चाहता हूं िक 
पूिर्णया, भागलपुर, मालदा एयरपोट्सर् का क्या हुआ? Ģधानमंतर्ी और गृह मंतर्ी जी, दोनȗ ने 
मुजÄफरपुर एयरपोटर् का वादा िकया था, उस वादे का क्या हुआ?  
सर, मेरे Îटेट कनार्टक मȂ िवजयपुरा, हासन, रायचूर, कारवार और मेरे िडिÎटर्क्ट 
बेÊलारी क े एयरपोट्सर् का क्या हुआ? ये वहाँ कब आएंगे, कब बनȂगे? सर, इन एयरपोट्सर् की 
अनाउंसमȂट करने क े बाद भी एक
 डेक े ड खत्म हो गया है। सर, इसी तरह से एयरपोटर् ऑनसर् की 
एक और मोनोपोली भी है। ऐसा लग रहा  है िक यह एयरपोटर् अथॉिरटी ऑफ इंिडया नहीं है,  यह 
डबल एएआई नहीं, बिÊक इसको िटर्पल एएएआई बना देना चािहए था।  सर, इन एयरपोट्सर् पर 
आम जनता £  रही है। चूँिक ये Ģाइवेटाइज़ हो गए हȅ, इसिलए आम जनता £  रही है। आप पािकȊ ग 
फीस देख लीिजए, पािकȊ ग चाजȃज़ देख लीिजए, यूजर डेवलपमȂट फीस देख लीिजए, लȅिंडग 
फीस देख लीिजए, यह कई गुना बढ़ गया है। अगर मȅ आपको एक एग्जांपल दूँ, तो लखनऊ 
एयरपोटर् पर एयरकर्ाÄट लȅिंडग फीस, एयरकर्ाÄट पािकȊ ग फीस 418 परसȂट से लेकर 471 परसȂट 
तक बढ़ गई है। इसी तरह से, िंहदुÎतान क े कई एयरपोट्सर् पर यह यूजर फीस कई गुना बढ़ गई 
है। यह इसिलए बढ़ी है, क्यȗिक अब यह क ंपलीटली Ģाइवेट एंटरĢाइजेज़ हो गए हȅ। * बीजेपी 
सरकार ने 25 एयरपोट्सर् को Ģाइवेटाइज कर
ने की बात कही है और इसके  िलए Ãलािंनग कर रही 
है। इसके  साथ-साथ, िदÊली, मुंबई, ह
ैदराबाद और बȂगलुरु  एयरपोट्सर् पर Îटेक्स भी Ģाइवेट 
क ंपनी को देने की बात की गई है। * 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Member, please refer to the 
text of the legislation. 
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 Not recorded. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
131

DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  Sir, I am completing.  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Member, please speak on the 
Bill.   
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  This is on the Bill only, Sir. * ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Member, it is on the Vayuyan 
Vidheyak, please speak on the Bill.   
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन :* ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  One minute.  There is a point of 
order.  Vajpayeeji, what is your point of order and under which rule?   
 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): ये िबल पर नहीं बोल रहे हȅ, इसे िरकॉडर् पर नहीं लाना 
चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरा यह कहना है िक ये जो भी बोल रहे हȅ, िवधेयक से अितिरƪ बोल रहे 
हȅ, इसिलए इसे िरकॉडर् पर नहीं लाना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  What is the rule number?  माननीय 
बाजपेयी जी, कौन स
े रूल  क े तहत? You have to cite the rule. आपको रूल  नंबर बताना 
होगा।  
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन : सर, हम ऑथȂिटके ट करȂगे।  *...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, this is the Vayuyan 
Vidheyak Bill; please focus on the Vayuyan Vidheyak or the issue. Hon. Member, I am 
sorry I ca
nnot allow this.  
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन :* ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  You are going on a very different 
track.  
 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
132
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन :  *...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Member, this discussion is on 
the Vayuyan Vidheyak. This is on Vayuyan Vidheyak.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. 
Member, I am sorry you cannot go on like this. …(Interruptions)… This is not a part of 
the legislation. …(Interruptions)… This is not a part of the Bill. …(Interruptions)… 
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन : * …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, I am sorry this is not 
part of the Bill. …(Interruptions)… You have to speak on the Bill. There is a point of 
order. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, please sit down, there is a point of order. 
 
DR. LAXMIKANT BAJPAYEE: Sir, it is under Rule 110; Scope of debate- The 
discussion on a motion that the Bill be pass ed shall be confined to the submission of 
arguments either in support of  the Bill or for the rejectio n of the Bill. In making his 
speech, a Member shall not refer to the details  of the Bill further than is necessary for 
the purpose of his arguments which shall be of a general character. रूल  110 क े  
अनुसार, ये सही नहीं बोल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ितवारी जी, आप बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Members, I am not allowing 
anyone else. …(Interruptions)… No, I am not allowing anyone else. …(Interruptions)… I 
have taken note of the point of order raised by Shri Bajpayee  that whatever is not 
under the scope of the Bill will not be there.  That will be taken
 care of. I have taken 
note of it. 
 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD (Maharashtra): That should be omitted.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): I have said that. Now, hon. Leader of 
the House. …(Interruptions)… Your time is there. Your time is not being disturbed.  
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : Sir with a very, very heavy heart, I want to express 
my opinion that a very senior Member of the Parliament, while participating in the 
discussion on the Vayuyan Vidheyak, not speaking on the subject and was maligning 
the name of hon. Prime Minister. Sir, speaking in such language is objectionable. I 
would request that we should, at least, maintain the dignity of the House while 
speaking and take care of the language wh ich we use in the House and we should 
speak on the Bill. The permission is given to  speak on the Bill. If you want a political 
discussion, there are many occasions when you can do it. So, I would like to request 
                                                            
* Not recorded 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
133

the hon. Chair, please go through the text and see that those comments be omitted, 
that has to be taken care of. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): I have taken note of the point of order 
raised by Dr. Bajpayee under Rule 110.  Refe rences that are not within the scope of 
the Bill will not be there; that is the point taken. Shri Pramod Tiwari ji, under which 
rule? 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान ):  सर, मȅ आपकी सुिवधा क े िलए रूल  110 की एक-एक लाइन पढ़ 
देता हूं - इस ĢÎताव पर िक िवधेयक को पािरत िकया जाए, चचार् िवधेयक क े समथर्न मȂ या 
िवधेयक अÎवीकृ त करने क े िलए िदये जाने वाले तकș तक सीिमत रहेगी।  मȅ इससे िबÊकु ल 
सहमत हूं।   
 सर, भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 पर चचार् हो रही है।  वायुयान िवधेयक पर चचार् 
करते समय जो-जो लोग इसके  ऑपरेटसर् हȅ, Ģमोटसर् हȅ या
 इससे कन्सन्डर् हȅ, उन पर चचार् होगी।  
जैसे मȅ लखनऊ का रहने वाला हूं, वहां का एयरपोटर् अदाणी का एयरपोटर् है, तो क्या लखनऊ पर 
चचार्
 इसिलए न हो िक वह अदाणी का एयरपोटर् है?  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Tiwari, I have taken note of your 
point. आपने अपना Ãवाइंट रख िदया है।  आपने अपनी बात रख ली है। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी  :  सर, जब भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक पर चचार् होगी, तो उसके  ऑपरेटर पर 
भी चचार् होगी, उसके  Ģमोटर पर भी चचार् होगी, उसके  मािलक पर भी चचार् होगी और उसकी 
कायर्वाही पर चचार् होगी।  ...(Ëयवधान
)... मȅ आपसे िवनĦतापूवर्क अनुरोध करूं गा िक इस चचार् 
...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैठ जाइए ...(Ëयवधान
)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): I have taken your point. माननीय ितवारी 
जी, मȅने आपका Ãवाइंट ले िलया है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... I will come to you. 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी  :  मȅने अपना Ãवाइंट िक्लयर कर िदया है िक अगर भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक 
पर चचार् होगी, तो जो-जो लोग उसके  ऑपरेटसर् और Ģमोटसर् दोनȗ हȅ, क्या िबना उनका नाम 
िलए चचार् हो सकती है? और दूसरा, क्या ' अदाणी' word parliamentary है या
 
unparliamentary, बता दȂ। 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: सर, कोई िकसी का मािलक नहीं है, यह पूरी 
जमीन सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट क े पास है और हम लीज़ पर ही देते हȅ, operate करने क े िलए देते हȅ। सर, 
कोई मािलक ऐसे नहीं बन जाता है। This whole land is with th e Central Government itself.  
So, he has to take back his words.   
134
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Members, let me make it very 
clear.  ...(Interruptions)... I have heard you.   ...(Interruptions)...  I
 am not allowing 
any more Members. ...(Interruptions)...   Mananiya Dangiji, I am making a very clear 
ruling.   As per Rule 110, whatever is a part of ...(Interruptions)...   
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा (हिरयाणा) : सर, रूल  238 क े तहत मेरा एक Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र है। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा) :  पहले मȅ रूल  110 पर हूँ।  माननीय जांगड़ा जी, आप बैठ 
जाइए।  As per Rule 110, whatever  is within the scope of the Bill will be examined and 
whatever wasn't within the scope ...(Interruptions)... Because, he was not only 
referring to the operator, there were seve ral references made which talked about 
Foreign Policy as well.   You would admit that.  ...(Interruptions)... I agree with you, 
on the point that you are saying on ‘operator’ ...(Interruptions)... So, my ruling is 
very clear on Rule 110.  I hope the entire Ho use is in agreement on that, as far as my 
ruling is concerned.  What is your point of order, Jangraji?   
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा : सर , रूल  238(ii) मȂ यह िक्लयर ह
ै: "िकसी सदÎय क े िवरुǉ Ëयिƪगत 
दोषारोपण नहीं करेगा" और रूल  238(v) है: "उच्च Ģािधकार वाले Ëयिƪयȗ क े आचरण पर तब 
तक आक्षेप नहीं करेगा, जब तक िक चचार् उिचत शÅदȗ मȂ रखे गए मूल ĢÎताव पर आधािरत न 
हो।" 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Your point of order is well taken. 
References which are not parliamentary, will not be there, thank you.  Ruling is given.   
Hon. Member, please continue.  ...(Interruptions)...  Absolutely.  I have taken your 
point.  He is referring to the other things.   
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन (कनार्टक): सर, म
ुझे यह नहीं समझ मȂ आ रहा है िक इसमȂ 
unparliamentary क्या था!  *मȅ जानना चाहता हूँ िक क्या unparliamentary है? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
मȅ जानना चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  We will examine.  Please continue. 
...(Interruptions)...  
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन : सर, क्या यह सच नहीं है ...(Ëयवधान)... * 
* Not recorded 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
135

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member, you are again going 
off the track.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन :  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):    I am sorry, I cannot allow you.  
...(Interruptions)... I am sorry, this is not going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...   I 
am sorry, I cannot allow you.  ...(Interruptions)... No; no, you are sensationalising 
now.  ...(Interruptions)...  Just one minute.  Hon. Leader of the House wants to say 
something.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सर, मȅ िफर से कांगर्ेस क े नेताओं से िनवेदन करू ँगा िक 
चचार् क े Îतर को नीचे न उतारȂ और चचार् को चचार् लायक रखȂ।  And, I said, Mr. Naseer, you 
are a senior leader.  You should maintain the dignity of the House, in your words, your 
speech.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member
, please continue.  
Please continue and speak on the Bill.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  Sir, there is nothing unparliamentary in this; nothing is 
unparliamentary in this.  ...(Interruptions)... I have not used a single word that is 
unparliamentary.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
 SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  ‘Ambassador of somebody’,  can it be said like 
this?  ...(Interruptions)... Can it be said like this?  ...(Interruptions)...  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Whatever is not relevant, that will not 
be a part of the proceedings.   ...(Interruptions)... Please continue. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:*  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Member, you will have to 
authenticate that. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  * 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
136
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member, you are going off the 
track here.  We are going off the track here.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  He should remember that he  should talk on facts.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member, please speak on the 
Bill.   
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  Sir, I am speaking on the Bill.  * 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You will have to authenticate all those. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. SAYED NASEER HUSSAIN: Please allow me to speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You need to authenticate; that is all.  
 
DR.  SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: That will be authenticated. Please allow me to 
speak.*...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon.  Member, this is not in the 
provisions of the Bill that you are talking about. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  This should also be included. ...( Interruptions)... 
This should also be included in that. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Please proceed.  
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन : सर, मȅ िबल पर ही बात कर रहा हूँ।  यह सरकार िजतना िंढढोरा पीट 
रही है, िजतना अपनी पीठ थपथपा रही है िक हमने इतने एयरपोट्सर् बना िदए, हमने इतना एयर 
टर्ैिफक बढ़ा िदया, तो मȅ इनसे यह भी पूछना चाहता हूँ िक एयर टर्ैिफक
 तो बढ़ा है, यह बड़ी क ंटर्ी 
है, तो एयर टर्ैिफक बढ़ेगा ही और एयरपोट्सर् बढ़Ȃगे ही, लेिकन एयरपोट्सर् पर िकतने foundation 
stones िकन्हȗने डाले थे, वह भी पता है।  लेिकन जो हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी कह रहे थे, जो मȅ अभी कह 
रहा था िक हवाई चÃपल वाले हवाई जहाज मȂ िदखाई देने चा
िहए।  उनको वहाँ िदखाई देने क े 
िलए िटकटȗ का रेट भी तो कम होना चािहए।  आपने इतनी मोनोपोली िकर्एट कर दी है िक िसफर् 
                                                            
* Not recorded 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
137

दो एयरलाइंस क े हाथ मȂ ही सारे एयरकर्ाÄट्स हȅ।  यहाँ िसफर् दो एयरकर्ाÄट क ैिरयसर् ही हȅ।  It is 
monopolised by only two companies.  तो आपके  हाथ मȂ क्या रहा?  आप क ै से हवाई चÃपल 
वालȗ को हवाई जहाज मȂ लेकर जाएँगे? Aircraft and air carrier s are monopolised by two 
companies. Airports are monopolised by  one person. So, how will you help the 
common man? How will you help hawai chappalwala ? So, what the hon. Prime 
Minister says, what the senior Minister s in this Government say and what is 
happening is completely different.  * ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon.  Member, again, you are going 
on that track.  You were speaking very nicely on the Bill. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:*...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, again, you are going 
on another track. ...(Interruptions)... You please come back to the topic and the 
scope of the Bill. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. SYED NASEER H
USSAIN: * ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, please, it is not going 
on record ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: Why it is not going on record?  This is related to 
aviation Bill.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You speak on the aviation Bill.  
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: That is what I am speaking. * 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You will have to authenticate all that. 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: 
 
 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
 
138
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA ): You have four more minutes. 
...(Interruptions)... Let's come to the point.  
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: * 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, the Bill is not about 
any investigation. The Bill is about Vayuyan.   
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: Sir, please allow me to speak. * 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): We will have to move on. If you are 
not going to speak on the Bill, we will have to move on.  
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: 
 ...(Interruptions)... 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): I am sorry; I will have to move on. 
This is not going on record. ...( Interruptions)... I am moving on to the next speaker 
now. I think you are not on the topic. ...( Interruptions)... Nothing is going on 
record....(Interruptions)... Thank you. 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: All irrelevant  things should be deleted from the 
record. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): As  per Rule 110, I have already ruled 
that anything which does not deserve to be  a part of this, as per the scope of the 
debate, will not be there. Thank you. Now, Shri Raghav Chadha.   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) (Contd.):   I want to inform only one 
thing that Shri Raghav Chadha will not be here tomorrow.  So, he had requested for a 
jump up and he has been allowed. ...(Interruptions)...    
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मेरा समय जा रहा है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 Not recorded. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
139

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Whatever is not within the scope as 
per Rule 110 ...(Interruptions)...  We will go by Rule 110.  ...(Interruptions)... Now, 
Shri Raghav Chadha. ...(Interruptions)...  I am not allowing anyone else.  I am sorry. 
...(Interruptions)...  I am not going into the merits of it. ...(Interruptions)...  No one 
else, Dangiji...(Interruptions)...  Now, Shri Raghav Chadha.   
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा (पंजाब): सर, इस िबल पर चचार् क े माध्यम से मȅ इस देश क े आम हवाई यातर्ी का 
ददर् आप सबके  सामने रखना चाहूँगा।  सर, वादा था िक हवाई चÃपल वालȗ को हवाई जहाज की 
सैर कराई जाएगी, लेिकन आलम यह है िक बाटा क ंपनी का जूता पहनने वाला भी आज हवाई 
जहाज का िटकट नहीं खरीद पा रहा ह
ै।  Economy class is no more economical. मȅ आज 
इस सदन मȂ बहस पर आने से पहले अपने फोन पर Äलाइट्स क े रेट चेक कर रहा था।  अगर कल 
मुझे िदÊली से मुंबई जाना हो तो वन-वे की सबसे सÎती िटकट 14,000 रुपए  की है, िदÊली से 
पटना जाना हो तो 12,000 रुपए  की िटकट है, िदÊली से बȂगलुरु  जाना हो
 तो 16,000 रुपए  की 
िटकट है।  वह छोिड़ए, संडे क े िदन, यानी परसȗ मȅ अपने क्षेतर् पंजाब से िदÊली आया।  चंडीगढ़ क े 
मोहाली एयरपोटर् से मȅने Äलाइट ली और िदÊली पहुँचा।  उस Äलाइट की िटकट 14,500 रुपए  की 
थी।  हम सांसदȗ को तो Äलाइट की reimbursement िमल जाती है।  आप उस आम नागिरक का 
सोिचए, जो इस sky-rocketing air p
rices से जूझ रहा है।  
सर, एक और िदलचÎप चीज है और वह यह ह
ै िक एक ही सेक्टर की, एक ही िदन की, 
सेम एयरलाइन की, जो अलग-अलग समय पर उड़ती है, उसकी भी रेट अलग-अलग है।  अगर 
आपको िकसी िदन एक एयरलाइन से सुबह दस बजे िदÊली से मुंबई जाना हो, तो आपको एक रेट 
िमलता ह
ै और उसी एयरलाइन से उसी िदन दोपहर दो बजे की िटकट लेना है, तो वह उससे 
दोगुनी हो जाती है।  न जाने क्या लॉिजक है?  सर, हमȂ इस देश म
Ȃ एयर यातर्ा को लग्जरी टर्ैवल 
नहीं बनाना है, बिÊक आम टर्ैवल बनाना है, जैसे िक टर्ेन का है।  सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक इस 
देश मȂ जहाज मȂ उड़ना और जहाज से उड़कर अपनी मंिजल पर पहुँचना आज भी देश की बहुत 
बड़ी आबादी क े िलए एक सपना है।  अगर टर्ेवल की रÄतार बढ़ेगी, तभी इस देश की रÄतार 
बढ़ेगी।  
सर, दूसरा ददर्, िजससे इस देश का आम आदमी रोज जूझ रहा है, वह है over-
crowded airports.  आज हमारे देश क े एयरपोट्सर् बस अƿे जैसे बन गए हȅ।  आज बस अƿȗ स
े 
भी बदतर ËयवÎथा देश क े एयरपोट्सर् पर है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  सर, िदÊली क े  Terminal-1 या 
Terminal-2 चले जाइए, आप वहाँ क े हालात द
ेिखए।  वहाँ पर लोग security line से लेकर 
check-in line तक लाइनȗ मȂ खड़े हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Members, 
please...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा : सर, लोगȗ क े लाइनȗ मȂ खड़े रहने क े कारण उनकी Äलाइट भी िमस हो जाती है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... एक मुसािफर सही समय पर अपनी Äलाइट नहीं पकड़ पा रहा है, क्यȗिक वह 
140
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

बेचारा security और  check-in line मȂ फ ंसा रहता है।  आज हमारे देश क े एयरपोट्सर् इतने 
ओवरकर्ाउडेड बन चुक े हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Members, 
please...(Interruptions)...  Please let the hon. Member speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
Ǜी राघव चǀा : सर, मुझे बोलने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  I am not yielding.    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Please, let him speak.  
Ǜी राघव चǀा : सर, आज एयरपोट्सर् पर खाना बहुत महँगा है, बाजार क े मुकाबले दोगुना, तीन 
गुना दाम है।  एक साधारण-सी पानी की बोतल, जो बाजार मȂ 20 रुपए  की िमलती है, वह 
एयरपोट्सर् क े भीतर जाकर फ ू ड आउटलेट्स पर 100 रुपए  की िमलती है।  आज जो यातर्ी अपनी 
Äलाइट का इंतजार कर रहा है, वह पानी पीकर अपना पेट भर रहा है िक कहीं ढाई
 सौ रुपए  की 
चाय और साढ़े तीन सौ रुपए  का समोसा न खरीदना पड़ जाए।  सर, आप बताइए िक क्या एक 
आम आदमी एयरपोटर् पर अपने जहाज का इंतजार करते हुए एक चाय नहीं पी सकता ह
ै?  क्या 
इस पर कोई रेग्युलेशन नहीं होना चािहए?  क्या कोई affordable canteen का mechanism नहीं 
होना चािहए?   
सर, चौथा ददर्, जो आज इस देश क े आम यातर्ी को सहन करना पड़ रहा है, वह ह
ै poor 
connectivity.  आज इस  देश क े कई ट ूिरįम Îपोट्स तक, कई फ ेमस शहरȗ तक Äलाइट नहीं 
पहुँचती है, क्यȗिक वहाँ पर एयरपोटर् नहीं है।  आज देश क े अिधकतर शहर ऐसे हȅ, जहाँ पर 
एयरपोटर् नहीं है।  इंसान को जहाज से उतर कर कई घ
ंटȗ का बस या गाड़ी का सफर तय करके  
अपनी मंिजल पर पहुँचना पड़ता है।      
सर, सरकार ने कहा है िक आप छ ुƺी मनाने क े िलए मालदीव मत जाइए, लक्षǎीप जाइए। 
मȅ आपको आज का र
ेट बता रहा हूँ।  अगर आज मुझे िदÊली से मालदीव जाना हो, तो Äलाइट की 
िटकट 17,000 रुपए  की है, लेिकन िदÊली से लक्षǎीप जाना हो, तो Äलाइट की िटकट 25,000 
रुपए  की है।  अब आप बताइए िक हम मालदीप जाएँ या लक्षǎीप जाए
ँ?  
सर, पाँचवां ददर्, जो आज एक आम यातर्ी को महसूस करना पड़ रहा है, वह है    flight 
cancellation and delays. सर, एक आम नागिरक अपनी मंिजल पर, अपने डेिÎटनेशन पर 
जÊद पहुंचने क े िलए कभी-कभार टर्ेन, बस या गाड़ी की यातर्ा नहीं करता, बिÊक वह हवाई 
जहाज की महंगी िटकट खरीदता है।  वह महंगी िटकट खरीदकर अपनी म
ंिजल पर समय पर 
पहुंचना चाहता है।  क ु छ ऐसे भी लोग हȅ जो आिर्थक तौर पर सक्षम नहीं हȅ, लेिकन आपातकालीन 
पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ वे भी महंगी िटकट खरीदकर हवाई जहाज की यातर्ा करना चाहते हȅ और अपनी 
मंिजल पर पहुंचना चाहते हȅ, लेिकन क्या वे अपनी मंिजल पर समय पर पहुंच पाते ह
ȅ।  आज हवाई 
जहाज िनधार्िरत समय से तीन से चार घंटे लेट चलते हȅ।  खास तौर पर, छोटे शहरȗ क े जो 
एयरपोट्सर् हȅ, वहां पर तो मैिक्समम िडलेज़ देखे गए हȅ।  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
141

सर, अगर एक क े जी एक्सेस बैगेज हो जाए, तो Äलाइट आपसे हजारȗ रुपय े का िकराया 
वसूलती है, लेिकन कई घंटȗ की िडले क े िलए क्या Äलाइट हमȂ कÇपȂसेट करती है?  मȅ आज 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह कहना चाहूँगा िक आप क ु छ ऐसा मेक ैिनज्म बनाएं िक Äलाइट क े हर घंटे 
क े िडले क े िलए एयरलाइन आम यातर्ी को कÇपȂसेट करे, उसकी जेब मȂ पैसा डाले।  इसी क े साथ-
साथ, हर महीने एक चाटर् जारी होना चािहए िक िकस सेक्टर की कौन सी एयरलाइन ने िकतने 
घंटे का िडले याितर्यȗ को िदया। 
सर, इसी क े साथ-साथ, आज भारत देश क े आम यातर्ी को जो छठा ददर् महसूस करना 
पड़ रहा है, वह है - lack of affordable options. अभी हमारे साथी भी यही बात कह रहे थे िक 
इस देश मȂ 90% एयर टर्ैवल दो एयरलाइंस क े पास है, 90 Ģितशत माकȃ ट शेयर दो एयरलाइंस 
क े पास है।  यानी, हमने एक cartel create कर िदया, duopoly create कर दी िक वे मनचाहे 
दाम पर मनचाही सिर्वसेज दȂगे, क्यȗिक कोई कॉिÇपटीशन ही नहीं, कोई ĢितÎपधार् ही नहीं है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा : सर, मेरा एक point of order है। 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): One minute.  Let me take up the point 
of order. …(Interruptions)… Yes, what is your point of order? …(Interruptions)…  
Ǜी राघव  चǀा : सर, मȅ एयरलाइन पर बोल रहा हूँ तो भी इनके  पेट मȂ ददर् हो रहा है।  
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा : सर, मेरा point of order िनयम 238क क े अंतगर्त है, िजसमȂ कहा गया है 
िक "कोई सदÎय िकसी अन्य सदÎय या लोक सभा क े िकसी सदÎय क े िवरुǉ मानहािनकारक 
या अपराध मȂ फ ंसाने वाले Îवरूप का कोई आरोप नहीं लगाएगा जब तक िक आरोप लगाने वाले 
सदÎय ने सभापित और संबंिधत मंतर्ी को भी इसकी पूवर् सूचना न दी हो तािक मंतर्ी उǄर िदए 
जाने क े Ģयोजन क े िलए इस िवषय की जांच कर सके ।" 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, there is no defamatory 
statement here.  …(Interruptions)…  There is no defamation.  
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा : सर, नािसर हुसैन जी ने जो बोला है, उसके  ऊपर मȅ यह कह रहा हूँ।  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  That has been taken into 
consideration. यह इनका नहीं है।  
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा : सर, एक िमनट।  पहले मेरी बात को पूरा कर लेने दीिजए।  इसमȂ आगे 
िलखा है, " परंतु सभापित िकसी समय िकसी सदÎय को कोई ऐसा आरोप लगाने से मना कर 
142
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

सके गा, यिद उसकी राय मȂ ऐसा आरोप राज्य सभा की गिरमा को घटाने वाला है या उस आरोप 
को लगाने से कोई लोकिहत िसǉ नहीं होता है।"  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you, Jangra ji.  Hon. Member, 
please continue. 
Ǜी राघव  चǀा : सर , इतनी िवशाल जनसंख्या वाला हमारा देश है और इतनी िवशाल जनसंख्या 
वाले देश मȂ मातर् दो ही क ंपिनयां हमारा पूरा एिवएशन सेक्टर चला रही हȅ।  सर, सरकार एक 
Îकीम लाई, िजसका नाम "उड़ान" था।  उसका फ ु ल फॉमर् है - उड़े देश का आम नागिरक, पर 
वह क ै से उड़े?  न Äलाइट क े उड़ने क े ऑÃशंस हȅ, न अफॉडȃबल िटकट है, न Äलाइट सही समय 
पर चलती है, तो िफर वह कहां उड़े, क ै से उड़े? सर, सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक जब से यह 
"उड़ान" Îकीम आई है, एिवएशन सेक्टर मȂ एक धारणा यह बनी हुई है िक जैसे ही यह Îकीम 
लागू हुई, दो एयरलाइंस, जेट एयरवेज और गो एयर बंद हो गईं और तीसरी, Îपाइसजेट बंद होने 
की कगार पर खड़ी है।  अब लोग यह भी कहने लग गए हȅ िक शायद "उड़ान" Îकीम एक बहुत 
बड़ा अपशकु न थी और इसी क े चलते आज हमारे देश का आम नागिरक Ãलेन से वापस टर्ेन पर जा 
रहा है। 
सर, मेरा सातवां ददर् baggage charges और baggage delays को लेकर है।  सर, अगर 
आपका एक क ेजी बैगेज ओवरवेट हो जाए, तो एयरलाइन आपसे एक्सेस बैगेज क े हजारȗ रुपए  
चाजर् वसूल लेती है।  यहां तक िक क ु छ लोग तो अब अपना सामान एयरपोटर् पर फ Ȃककर चले जाते 
हȅ, क्यȗिक उनके  सामान मȂ पड़ी वÎतुएं इतनी महंगी नहीं होती हȅ, िजतना बैगेज चाजȃस 
एयरलाइंस ले लेती हȅ।  सर, बैगेज की िडलेज़ देिखए।  आपको बैगेज बेÊट पर एक लंबा इंतजार 
करना पड़ता है िक कब हमारा बैग आएगा।  जब हम Îकर्ीन पर देखते हȅ, तो Îकर्ीन पर िलखा 
आता है - Baggage is on the belt, लेिकन baggage on belt नहीं होता। ...(Ëयवधान)... उस 
पर िसफर् दो-तीन िबजनेस क्लास पैसȂजसर् का बैग आता है और न जाने िकतने िमनट्स एक आम 
नागिरक को इस एक्सेस िडले क े िलए इंतजार करना पड़ता है।  इसको Îटȅडडार्इज़ करने क े िलए 
सरकार को कोई Ģोसीजर बनाना चािहए।  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You have one more minute. 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, अब मȅ समाÃत कर रहा हूँ। सर, मेरा आठवां ददर् heavy car parking 
charges at airports को लेकर है।  आज आप एयरपोट्सर् पर पािकȊ ग का ठेका िकसी एक क ंपनी 
को दे देते हȅ और वह मनचाहे दाम वसूलती है।  खास तौर पर, छोटे एयरपोट्सर् पर 200-250 
रुपय े Ģित घंटे क े कार पािकȊ ग चाजȃज देने पड़ते हȅ।  आज आप िदÊली क े एयरपोटर् चले जाइए, 
वहां 220 रुपय े Ģित घंटा गाड़ी का चाजर् लगता है।  अगर आपने कोई क ै ब या टैक्सी बुक कर ली, 
तो उसका भी मोटा िबल आता है, क्यȗिक वह टैक्सी वाला भी एक्सपȂिसव कार पािकȊ ग चाजȃज, 
एयरपोटर् चाजȃज अपने िबल मȂ जोड़कर आपको देता है। 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
143

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude.  
Ǜी राघव चǀा : सर, यह ददर् Äलाइट मȂ चढ़ने से लेकर Äलाइट से उतरने का था। मȅ अंत मȂ चार 
पंिƪयां सुनाकर अपनी वाणी को िवराम दूंगा। आज इस देश क े आम नागिरक आम यातर्ी का ददर् 
इन पंिƪयȗ क े माध्यम से आप तक पहुंचाने की कोिशश करूं गा-  
“कहीं हȅ लÇबी लाइनȂ ,कहीं चेकइन से पहले काउंटर बंद, 
कहीं Îलो चल रहा है सवर्र ,कहीं इंटरनेट ह
ै मंद, 
महंगी िटकट क े बाद भी यातर्ा की कोई गारंटी नहीं, 
आपका सामान चाहे ट ू टे ,चाहे फ ू टे कोई वारंटी नहीं, 
जो हाल है बस अƿȗ का, वही तÎवीर आती है एयरपोटर् से, 
चाय हो या समोसा ,नहीं िमल रहा पाँच सौ रुपय े क े नोट से, 
रोज़ Ƣाइट्स बंद हो रही हȅ धमकी ,बम ,िवÎफोट स
े, 
कब तक आम आदमी मरता रहेगा एयरपोटर् की छत िगरने की चोट से, 
जनता की मुिÌकलȂ तो पल भर मȂ िमट जाएं, 
अगर सरकार को फ ु सर्त िमल जाए चुनाव या वोट से। ” 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Hon. Members, may I have your 
attention, please? Hon. Members, the de bate will continue tomorrow. We will now 
take up Special Mentions. माननीय Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा जी। स
ंजय क ुमार झा साहब
 क े पास 
Îपेशल मȂशन पहुंचा नहीं है। हम नेक्Îट Ãवाइंट पर चलते हȅ, तब तक उनके  पास Îपेशल मȂशन 
पहुंच जाएगा। माननीय Ǜी नरेश बंसल जी। Hon. Members, those who are leaving, may 
kindly leave silently. जो लोग जाना चाहते हȅ, वे कॉिरडोसर् मȂ न रहȂ। िजन लोगȗ को जाना है, व
े 
चले जाएं, िजन लोगȗ को रुकना  है, वे रुकȂ, but do it silently,  in an orderly fashion. 
Thank you.  
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
Demand to fix rates of various t
reatments and procedures in private hospitals for 
general public on the lines of CGHS 
Ǜी नरेश बं
सल (उǄराखंड) : महोदय, देश मȂ िनजी क्षेतर् क े अÎपतालȗ की इलाज दरȗ मȂ घोर 
असमानता है। िनजी अÎपतालȗ क े महंगे इलाज क े एवज मȂ बीमार Ëयिƪ को भारी-भरकम िबल 
चुकाना पड़ता है, िजससे उसकी आिर्थक िÎथित खराब हो जाती है। इसका एक मुख्य कारण 
िनजी अÎपताल की दरȗ पर कोई िनयंतर्ण न होना है। िनजी अÎपताल मरीजȗ से इलाज क े एवज मȂ 
मनमाने तरीके  से धनरािश वसूलते हȅ, इसकी कोई पॉिलसी नहीं है। पॉिलसी क े अभाव म
Ȃ जनता 
144
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

इलाज क े िलए मनमानी रािश देने हेतु बाध्य है। ‘Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना’ एवं ‘आयुÍमान 
योजना’ मील का पत्थर सािबत हुई है, िजसने गरीब को अच्छा इलाज व राहत दी है। 
महोदय, मȅ सरकार क े संज्ञान मȂ लाना चाहता हूं िक देश मȂ संचािलत मेिडक्लेम क ंपिनयां 
अपने पॉिलसी होÊडर को सÎती दरȗ पर इन्हीं िनजी अÎपतालȗ मȂ इलाज कराने क े िलए समझौता 
करती हȅ, िजनकी दर काफी कम है। इसी Ģकार सीजीएचएस की दर भी है। जब छोटी-छोटी 
मेिडक्लेम क ंपिनयां, िनजी अÎपतालȗ से समझौता करके  सÎती दरȗ पर इलाज करा सकती हȅ, तो 
सरकार क्यȗ िनजी अÎपतालȗ क े िलए दर तय नहीं करती, िजसके  आधार पर जनता सÎती दरȗ 
पर इलाज करा सके ? 
महोदय, सरकार से मेरी मांग ह
ै िक िनजी अÎपतालȗ मȂ इलाज हेतु सभी चीजȗ की दर तय 
की जाए, िजसके  आधार पर आम नागिरक िनजी अÎपतालȗ से सÎती दरȗ पर इलाज करा सके । 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Naresh Bansal:   Shri M. Mohamed A bdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sikander Kumar 
(Himachal Pradesh), Dr. John Brittas (K erala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri Ramb
hai Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat).   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा) : माननीय Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा जी। 
 
Demand for establishment of Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA) Centre in Bihar 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा (िबहार) : महोदय, िबहार से उच्च मूÊय वाले क ृिष उत्पादȗ जैसे मखाना और 
लीची का िनयार्त लगातार बढ़ रहा है। वषर् 2023-24 मȂ क ेवल मखाना का िनयार्त लगभग 300 
करोड़ रुपय े का था। इसके  अलावा, िबहार मȂ भागलपुरी शाही लीची, जदार्लू आम, कतरनी चावल 
और मगही पान जैसे GI- टैग वाले क ृिष उत्पादȗ की अपार क्षमता है। िबहार क े िकसान और 
Ëयापारी वतर्मान मȂ वाराणसी मȂ िÎथत Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA) क Ȃ दर् क
े  माध्यम से क ृिष िनयार्त करते हȅ, लेिकन इस Ģिकर्या 
मȂ क ु छ किठनाइयȗ का सामना करना पड़ता है। िबहार मȂ पटना, दरभंगा और गया एयरपोटर् 
िनरंतर पिरचालन मȂ हȅ, और जÊद ही पूिर्णया एयरपोटर् भी पूरी तरह से तैयार हो जाएगा।  यह 
एयरपोटर् िबहार मȂ क ृिष उत्पादȗ क े िनयार्त को और आसान बनाएगा। 
 इस संदभर् मȂ, मेरा सरकार से अनुरोध है िक िबहार मȂ APEDA क Ȃ दर् की Îथापना पर िवचार 
करे। इस क Ȃ दर् की Îथापना से िबहार क े Ģीिमयम क ृिष उत्पादȗ जैस
े मखाना, लीची और अन्य 
GI-टैग उत्पादȗ क े िनयार्त को बढ़ावा िमलेगा।  साथ ही, यह क Ȃ दर् मूÊय विर्धत ĢसंÎकरण, िकसानȗ 
को बेहतर Ģिशक्षण और िबहार की क ृिष अथर्ËयवÎथा को सुदृढ़ करने मȂ सहायक होगा। इससे 
राज्य क े क ृिष क्षेतर् को वैिÌवक बाजारȗ मȂ बेहतर पहचान िमल सके गी और िकसानȗ  की आय मȂ भी 
वृिǉ होगी।    
   
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
145

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Sanjay Kumar Jha:  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam.   Not 
present. Shri  Dorjee Tshering Lepcha.  
 
Demand for Green Bonus and Special Package for Sikkim State 
 
SHRI DORJEE TSHERING LEPCHA (Sikkim):  Sikkim, nestled in the lap of Mount 
Khangchendzonga, the third highest peak in the world, is a green State with 82 per 
cent forest land and over 47 per cent fore st cover despite over 30 per cent area under 
snow and rocks which is among the high est in the country.  Over 31 per cent 
Protected Area Network, the highest in th e country, boasts a lone National Park, a 
UNESCO World Heritage site under the mixed category of nature and culture, first of 
its kind in India. 
 As the world's mega-biodiversity hotspot, Sikkim harbours 26 per cent of India's 
biodiversity within just 0.2 per cent of its area.  Its 84 glaciers, 534 lakes, and rivers 
and mountains are crucial for maintaining water cycle and energy  security for the 
nation and beyond. 
 Sikkim, India's first 100 per cent organic State, won the Future Policy Gold Award, 
'Oscar for best policies', from the UN's F ood and Agriculture Organisation in 2018; 
was declared India's cleanest state by NSSO  in 2015; won India Today's State of the 
States Awards for Economy, Environment and Law & Order in 2021; and awarded 
Best State for Environment Education in 2024  by the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change.  Despite Sikkim's ecosystem services benefiting the nation and 
the world, it faces opportunity costs from land-use restrictions for conservation, its 
commitment to Nationally Determined Co ntributions & Sustainable Development 
Goals, and bears financial burdens from natural disasters like recent flash floods and 
GLOF (Glacial Lake Outburst Flood), disp roportionately shouldering the cost of 
maintaining its natural treasure. 
 Therefore, I respectfully request the Go vernment for a Green Bonus and Special 
Package to help Sikkim manage its financia l burden and preserve  the nation's vital 
natural resources. 
 
146
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Dorjee Tshering Lepcha:  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan) 
and Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh). 
 
Concern over Mismatched Skill Development 
 
SHRI NARAIN DASS GUPTA (National Capital Territory of Delhi):  Sir, India’s growing 
population, particularly the rising working age segment, people in the age bracket of 
15-59, which stood at 55.4 per cent in 1991  and projected to reach 65 per cent in the 
next Census, is proving to be an asset.    But the attempt to leverage this 
demographic advantage is yet to succeed,  as the youth are underprepared for 
industry demands. The employment rate has dipped to 46.8 per cent in second 
quarter of 2024, indicating a declining jo b market.  While the Government claims 
India’s low corporate tax rate (22 per cent) as  a growth driver, this has not translated 
into job security, as companies continue laying  off staff to prioritize profits, leveraging 
tax savings without accountability for hiring  or job creation. Though some schemes 
like Skill India, Make in India, Vocal for Local  have made some impact, yet it needs 
further acceleration. The skill development initiatives rolled out by the Government 
need to be reviewed as studies show th at 33 per cent of India’s educated youth 
remain unemployed due to mismatched skill s. The current educational curriculum is 
outdated, and it needs comprehensive national  strategy to align it  with the evolving 
demands of industries like technology , green energy and manufacturing. The 
Government policies should bridge the gap of expected skill-set between the job-
givers and the job-seekers. I urge the Government to look into it.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Narain Dass Gupta: Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Issue of mismanagement during Manimahesh Yatra in Himachal Pradesh 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार (िहमाचल Ģदेश) : महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे एक 
बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है।  
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
147

उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मिणमहेश, जो िक एक पिवतर् िहन्दू तीथर् Îथल है और िजसकी 
यातर्ा अगÎत महीने मे ĢारÇभ होती है, एक बहुत किठन यातर्ा हैI यह तीथर् Îथल िजला - चÇबा, 
तहसील-भरमौर, िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ िÎथत हैI यह Îथानीय लोगȗ क े िलए रोजगार की दृिÍट से भी 
बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् हैI हर साल लाखȗ Ǜǉालु मिणमहेश क े दशर्न करने क े िलए आते हȅI Ǜǉालुओं 
क े िलए िचिकत्सा एवं ÎवाÎथ्य से लेकर हेलीकाÃटर, पिरवहन, आवास, शौचालय एवं िबजली 
जैसी आवÌयक सुिवधाओं की बहुत कमी हैI वहीं दूसरी ओर टर्ैिफक जाम की समÎय
ा भी बहुत 
िवकट है, िजसका समाधान सुंक ू की टÃपरी से थला चोिबआ होकर हड़सर को िमलाकर, कोउ 
स
ेरी क े पुल को मजबूत बना कर और नेशनल हाईवे 154A का िवÎतार करके  िकया जा सकता है। 
महोदय, इसकी समीक्षा की जाये I  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ भारत सरकार से आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ िक मिणमहेश यातर्ा पर 
आने वाले Ǜǉालुओं की सुिवधाओं को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए यहाँ पर िचिकत्सा एवं ÎवाÎथ्य, संचार, 
िबजली, हेलीकाÃटर, पिरवहन एवं यातायात की सुचारु  ËयवÎथा, आवास एवं शौचालय ज
ैसी 
जरूरी  सुिवधाओं का Ģबंध तथा टर्ैिफक की समÎया का भी िनवारण िकया जाये I व
ैÍणो देवी Ǜाइन 
बोडर्, अमरनाथ Ǜाइन बोडर् की तरह ही यहाँ पर भी बोडर् की Îथापना की जाये, िजससे यहाँ क े 
िवकास और ËयवÎथा का संचालन सुचारु  रूप  से हो सके । 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by th e hon. Member, Dr. 
Sikander Kumar: Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Shri 
Nagendra Ray (West Bengal), Shri Naveen Jain (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
(Maharashtra), Shri Naresh Bansal (U ttarakhand), Shri T
ejveer Singh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadi k (Maharashtra), Shri Aditya Prasad 
(Jharkhand), Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai De sai (Gujarat) and Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh). 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Shri A.D. Singh; not present. Now, 
Dr. Bhim Singh.  
Demand for increase in the fellowships for OBC researchers 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार) :  महोदय, भारत की िवÌविवǏालय Ģणाली क े तहत अनुसूिचत जाित क े 
छातर्ȗ को पीएचडी क े माध्यम से अनुसंधान कायर् करने क े िलए राÍटर्ीय अध्येतावृिǄ Ģदान की 
जाती है। यह वगर् देश की क ु ल आबादी का 16.6 Ģितशत है। इस वगर् को Ģितवषर् 2,000 
अध्येतावृिǄयां Ģदान की जाती हȅ, िजनमȂ से 75 Ģितशत यूजीसी-नेट (UGC-NE
T) और 25 
Ģितशत संयुƪ सीएसआईआर-यूजीसी (CSIR- UGC) परीक्षा क
े  अंतगर्त आने वाले िवषयȗ क े 
िलए िनधार्िरत होती हȅ। 
     14% आबादी वाले किथत अÊपसंख्यक समुदाय क े छातर्ȗ क े िलए मौलाना आजाद राÍटर्ीय 
148
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

अध्येतावृिǄ (MANF) को यǏिप अब अÊपसंख्यक कायर् मंतर्ालय ǎारा 25 नवंबर, 2022 को बंद 
कर िदया गया है, पर पहले इस योजना क े अंतगर्त हर वषर् 1,000 अध्येतावृिǄयां Ģदान करने का 
Ģावधान था। 
        मȅ सरकार का ध्यान देश की सबसे बड़ी आबादी ( मंडल आयोग क े अनुसार 52% और 
NSSO क े अनुसार 44%) की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ, िजसे अन्य िपछड़ा वगर् (OBC) क े 
नाम से जाना जाता है। वतर्मान मȂ, ओबीसी छातर्ȗ क े िलए राÍटर्ीय अध्येता
वृिǄ (NFOBC) योजना 
क े तहत Ģित वषर् मातर् 1,000 अध्येतावृिǄयां Ģदान की जाती हȅ। यह देखकर अत्यंत िनराशा होती 
है िक देश की सबसे बड़ी आबादी क े िलए इतनी कम अध्येतावृिǄयȗ का Ģावधान है। महोदय, इसे 
बढ़ाया जाना समय की माँग है। 
        अत
:, मȅ सरकार से माँग करता हूँ िक इस वगर् क े साथ न्याय सुिनिÌचत करते हुए ओबीसी 
शोधािर्थयȗ क े िलए कम से कम 6000 अध्येतावृिǄयȗ  की ËयवÎथा की जाए। 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Dr. Bhim 
Singh: Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
Urgent need to address train sabotage and anti-national activities 
SHRI LAHAR SINGH SIROYA (Karnataka):  Sir, the alarming rise in attempts to derail 
trains across the country poses a severe threat to public safet
y and national security. 
Recent incidents indicate coordinated efforts to target India’s railway network, a vital 
lifeline of the nation.  
 In Punjab’s Bathinda, nine iron rods were strategically placed on the Delhi-
Bathinda Express track on September, 22 nd. Similarly, large cement blocks, each 
weighing 70 kg, were discovered on the Ajmer-Ahmedabad railway route in Rajasthan 
on September, 8 th, posing a significant risk of de railments. Near Kanpur, the Kalindi 
Express narrowly averted disaster when an LPG cylinder and explosives placed on the 
tracks caused an explosion.   
These deliberate acts of sabotage, seemingly orchestrated by radical groups, 
reveal a coordinated attempt to destabilize th e country.  Immediate action is critical. I 
urge that the Government should empower the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
to conduct thorough investigations into  these incidents and strengthen railway 
security across the nation. Swift measures are essential to protect lives, restore 
public confidence, and uphold national inte grity.  The urgency for vigilance has never 
been greater. India cannot afford complacency in the face of such threats. 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
149

Urgent need to revoke the merger of RMS Offices with Speed Post Hubs 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala):  Sir, the recent directive fr om the Department of Posts 
to merge Railway Mail Service (RMS) offi ces with Speed Post hubs and process 
Registered Post alongside Speed Post has raised serious concerns.  Under the new 
order, 312 RMS offices will be permanently closed and 93 cities, including 12 in 
Kerala, will lose their sorting hubs or RMS offices. Processing Speed Post and 
Registered articles in the same hub is lik ely to cause delays due to back routing, 
space constraints, and the elimination of 12 mail offices. Additionally, the absence of 
standardized postage rates means customers are being charged differently for similar 
services, undermining trust. 
This move will force many employees to  relocate, adversely affecting their 
health and productivity. Over 3,000 te mporary workers face job losses and 
skyrocketing unemployment. Additionally, re locating mail offices away from railway 
premises will increase transit delays and costs. 
This merger imposes unnecessary financ ial burdens. Coupled with the New 
Post Office Act allowing private players in logistics and communication, the public 
postal system risks losing its competitive edge. 
I urge the Union Government to revoke  this order and safeguard RMS offices. 
Furthermore, new posts should  be created in RMS with  regular recruitment to 
strengthen the system and ensure its sustainability. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri A.A. 
Rahim:   Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala) and Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala).    
Demand for restoring education to State List for a more effective system 
S H R I  T I R U C H I  S I V A  ( T a m i l  N a d u ) :   S i r ,  t h i s  i s  t o  u r g e  t h e  G o v e r n m e n t  t o  r e s t o r e  
education in India to the State List to empower States to address local needs and 
uphold federalism.  Historically a State List  subject, it was shifted to the Concurrent 
List during the Emergency in 1976 as a cen tralizing measure.  This decision, made 
under extraordinary circumstances, has si nce become redundant and increasingly 
misaligned with India’s diverse educational la ndscape. India’s vast diversity – with 26 
150
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

crore students and the vast gap in the literac y rate of Bihar compared with Kerala and 
Tamil Nadu – demonstrates the need for localized policymaking. 
Centrally-driven education policies ov erlook regional nuances, leading to 
inefficiencies.  For instance, Eklavya Mode l Residential Schools, meant for tribal 
students, face challenges stemming from  centralized hiring.  Teachers recruited 
centrally struggle with regional language s, creating a disconnect that hampers 
learning.  Tamil Nadu has consistently oppo sed NEET, since it restricts students from 
rural areas and those educated in the State Board syllabus. 
States are better equipped to design policies tailored to their specific socio-
cultural landscapes.  Decentralization allows States to innovate, ensuring systems are 
responsive to local needs.  Returning ‘Education’ to the State List would restore 
States’ autonomy, enhance accountability, and enable localized strategies crucial for 
improving educational outcomes in a diverse country like India.  Sir, I urge the 
Government to look into it.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Tiruchi Siva: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri  A.A. Rahim(Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN So mu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri N.R. Elango 
(Tamil Nadu). 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Now, Dr. John Brittas. 
Demand for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) by way of non-repayable grant for Vizhinjam 
International Seaport Thiruvananthapuram
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, Vizhinjam Seaport exemplifies Kerala’s s
uccess in 
infrastructure development.  As India’ s deepest port capable of accommodating 
mother ships, its strategic location along major international shipping routes positions 
it to compete with global maritime hubs like Colombo, Singapore and Dubai. 
This project holds the distinction of being the first port initiative to secure 
approval for VGF for Rs. 817.80 crores.  However, while a pproving VGF grant in 2015, 
Centre made a stipulation requiring Kerala to repay the VGF grant later in NPV terms 
through revenue sharing. 
Kerala is investing resources worth Rs. 5595 crores out of the total project 
outlay of Rs. 8,867 crores.  Additional re payment burden of Rs. 817.80 croes in NPV 
[ 03 December, 2024 ]
151

terms would inflate Kerala’s liability by ar ound Rs. 12,000 crores in actual terms, 
straining its limited fiscal resources. 
I urge Government to release Vizhinjam’s full VGF amount without repayment 
conditions and ensure parity in infrastructure project treatment across Stats for 
equitable development.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  It doesn’t go on record.  I am sorry; it 
doesn’t go on record. Whatever is not in the text will go on record. The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Dr. John Brittas: Shri A.A. Rahim (Keral a), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) 
and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The House stands adjourned to meet 
at 11 a.m. on Wednesday, the 4th December 2024. 
The House then adjourned at fifty-eight minutes past five of the clock till eleven of  
the clock on Wednesday, the 4th December 2024. 
 Not Recorded 
152
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SAB
HA) 