Vol. 270                 Friday,  
No. 8 6 February, 2026 
               17 Magha, 1947(Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 – 7) 
Statement by Minister—  
Status of implementation of the Obse rvations/Recommendations contained in 
the One Hundred Eighty-eighth Repo rt of the Department-related 
Parliamentary   Standing Committee on Commerce (pages 7 – 8) 
Matters raised with permission—  
Need to curb ultra-processed foods to  protect children’s health and build a 
strong foundation for a developed India (pages 8 – 9) 
Concern over rising cyber frauds target ing tourists in Goa and other tourist 
destinations (pages 9 – 11) 
Need for strengthening road safety infrastructure for Persons with 
Disabilities (pages 11 – 12) 
Demand for 45-Day Paid Elderly Welln ess Leave to support India’s senior 
citizens (pages 12 – 13)
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Concern over the inadequate conservation  of national heritage sites in the 
country (pages 13 – 14)  
Concern over the menace of stray animals in Uttar Pradesh (pages 15 – 16) 
Need for enhancement of air connectivity and flight operations at Belagavi 
Airport in Karnataka (pages 16 – 17) 
Demand for construction of flyover or underground passage to protect elephant 
and wildlife corridors in the foothill areas of North Bengal (page 17) 
Need for reduction of interest rates on Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and 
REC loans to alleviate financial st ress on Tamil Nadu Generation and 
Distribution Corporation (TANGEDCO) (page 18) 
Need for continuity of life-saving treatme nt for patients with Lysosomal Storage 
Disorders (page 19) 
Demand for establishment of assembly units of electronic/electrical garments 
PSU in Manipur (page 20) 
Concern over shortage of qualified speci al needs educators and its impact on 
inclusive education in the country (pages 20 – 21) 
Concern over repeated ONGC blowouts and industrial safety failures in Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar Konaseema District, Andhra Pradesh (pages 21 – 22) 
Proposal for introduction of Corporat e Research Responsibility (CRR) in the 
Companies Act (pages 22 – 24) 
Concern over the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  (PMGSY) Guidelines in 
Hilly region (pages 24 – 25) 
Demand  to  protect and commemorate the site of derailment of a Military 
Special  Train at Panikhaiti (Assam)  during the Quit India Movement 
(pages 25 – 26) 
Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
            https://sansad.in/rs 
 E-mail:     rsedit-e@rss.sansad.in 
 

Need for regulation of social media to  prevent spread of rumors and ensure 
accountability (pages 26 – 27) 
Demand to integrate Foot Reflexology Studies under the AYUSH 
Framework (pages 27 – 28) 
Demand for introduction of a premium train service between Pune and 
Delhi (page 29) 
Need for all-weather connectivity to Pangi Valley through the Chamba-Killar-Leh 
corridor (pages 29 – 30) 
Need to review ethanol supply cuts by  Oil Marketing Companies in Bihar to 
ensure contract continuity and policy stability (pages 30 – 31) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 31 – 59) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Ra jya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials]  
Private Members’ Bills— 
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Bill, 2024—Introduced  (page 60) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of articles 243D and 
243T)— Introduced  (page 60) 
The Census (Amendment) Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 61) 
The Airline Passengers’ Rights Bill, 2024—Introduced (page 61) 
The Employees’ Wellbeing Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 61) 
The Regulation of Animal Breeding Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 62) 
The National Commission for Fish ermen (Welfare and Support) 
Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 62) 
The Representation of the Pe ople (Amendment) Bill, 2025 (amendment of 
section 2 and insertion of new Chapter VIIB)—  Introduced (pages 62 - 63)  
The Environment (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 63) 

The Educational Consultancies Regulation Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 63) 
The Right to Disconnect Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 63) 
The Scheduled Castes and the Schedule d Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Amendment Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 64) 
The Small Claims Court Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 64) 
The Persons with Rare and Life-Threaten ing Diseases (Financial Support and 
Medical Entitlement) Bill, 2025—  Introduced (pages 64 – 65) 
The Clinical Establishments (Regis tration and Regulation) Amendment  
Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 65) 
The Kisan Jeevan Suraksha Evam Durghatna Pratipurti Vidheyak ,  
2025—  Introduced (page 65) 
The Pravasi Bharatiya Kaushal Evam  Pratibha Prerak Vidheyak ,  
2025—  Introduced (page 66) 
The National Ranking and Accreditatio n Authority for Higher Educational 
Institutions Bill, 2025—  Introduced (page 66) 
The National Commission for Women (Amendment) Bill, 2025 —   
Introduced (page 66 – 67 ) 
The Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2026 —   
Introduced (page 67) 
The Commission for Air Quality Manageme nt in National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Bill, 2026—  Introduced (page 68) 
The Online Matrimonial and Dating Servi ces (Promotion and Regulation) Bill, 
2026—  Introduced (page 68) 
The Medical Gases (Quality, Safety and Regulation) Bill, 2026 —   
Introduced (page 69) 
The Delivery Platforms (Verification of Antecedents of Delivery Personnel)  
Bill, 2026 —  Introduced (page 69) 

The Artificial Intelligence (Human Health  and Medical Education) Regulation 
Bill, 2026—  Introduced (pages 69 – 70) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2026 ( amendment of articles 15,16, 124, 
217, 224 and Seventh Schedule and substitution of  
article 130)—  Introduced (page 70) 
The Virtual Court Proceedings Bill, 2026—  Introduced (page 70) 
The Temple Autonomy, Governance and Cultural Heritage Management  
Bill, 2026—  Introduced (page 71) 
The Advanced Medical Response Infrastructure and Training  
Bill, 2026—  Introduced (page 71) 
The Domestic Workers (Social S ecurity and Welfare) Bill, 2026 —   
Introduced (pages 71 – 72) 
The Shakti Samman (Pay Parity for Women) Bill, 2026 —   
Introduced (page 72) 
The Critical Infrastructure (Resilience, Protection and Accountability) Bill, 
2026—  Introduced (page 72) 
The Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2024 —   
Withdrawn (page 73) 
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment)  
Bill, 2024—  Under Consideration (pages 73 – 76) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 6th February, 2026/17 Magha, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be laid on the Table. 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
II. Report and Accounts (2024-25) of the DIC, New Delhi and related papers
III. Notifications of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I lay on the Table — 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology Notification No. HQ- 30011/5/2025-AU-HO., dated the 9 th December,
2025, publi
shing the Aadhaar (Authenticat ion and Offline Verification) Amendment
Regulations, 2025, under Section 55 of the Aadhaar (Targeted De livery of Financial
and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6176/18/26] 
II. (1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Digital India Corporation (DIC), New
Delhi, for the year 2024-25, together  with the Auditor's Report on the
Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) gi ving reasons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6177/18/26] 

III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of th e following Notifications of the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry (Department fo r Promotion of Industry and Internal
Trade), issued under Section 16 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016: -
(1) S.O. 165(E)., dated the 12 th January, 2026, rescinding the Notification No.
S.O. 4092(E), dated the 18th September, 2023.
(2) S.O. 187(E)., dated the 13 th January, 2026, publishing the Electrical
Accessories (Quality Control) Amendment Order, 2026.
(3) S.O. 219(E)., dated the 15 th January, 2026, publishing the Cookware,
Utensils and Cans for Foods and Beverages (Quality Control) Order, 2026.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6310/18/26] 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
II. Report and Accounts (2021-22) of MAIDCL, Mumbai
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी रामनाथ ठाकु र): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:–  
I . ( i )     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfar e (Department of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare), issued under Section 5 of the Insecticides Act, 1968: -
(1) S.O. 6028(E)., dated the 26 th December, 2025, amending the Principal
Notification No. S.O. 79(E), dated the 3rd February, 1997.
(2) S.O. 91(E)., dated the 6 th January, 2026, amending the Principal
Notification
 No. S.O. 79(E), dated the 3rd February,1997.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see No. L.T. 6148/18/26] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Fa rmers Welfare) Notification No.  S.O. 
90(E)., dated the 6 th January, 2026, amending the Principal Notification No. G.S.R. 
301(E), dated the 1 st March, 1971, issued under Sect ion 4 of the Insecticides Act, 
1968. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6148/18/26] 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Welfare (Department of Agri culture and Farmers Welfare) Notification No. S.O. 
271(E)., dated the 20th January, 2026, publishing the Plant Quarantine (Regulation of 
Import into India) (First Amendment) Order, 2026, issued under sub-section (1) of 
Section 3 of the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6315/18/26] 
I I .    ( 1 )    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(a) Fifty-sixth Annual Report and Account s of the Maharashtr a Agro Industries 
Development Corporation Ltd. (MAIDC L), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the 
year 2021-22, together with   the Au ditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
    (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6147/18/26] 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Railways 
II. Report (2024-25 ) on the Progress made in the intake of SC  and ST against 
vacancies reserved for them in recruitment and promotion categories on the 
Railways  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (SHRI RAVNEET 
SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table: - 
I.   (i)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Railways framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India:- 
(1) G.S.R.852(E)., dated the 17 th November, 2025, publishing the Railway 
Services (Payment of Gratuity under National Pension System) Rules, 2025, 
along with delay statement. 
(2) G.S.R. 23(E)., dated the 13 th January, 2026, publishing the Railway 
Services (Pension) Rules, 2026. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see No. L.T. 6185/18/26] 
     
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
3

 
 
(ii)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mini stry of Railways Notification No. G.S.R. 
41(E)., dated the 16 th January, 2026, publishi ng the Railway Passengers 
(Cancellation of Ticket and Refund of Fa re) Amendment Rules, 2026, under Section 
199 of the Railways Act, 1989. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6186/18/26] 
 
II.     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 
(a) Report on the Progress made in the intake of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes against vacancies reserved for them in recruitment and 
promotion categories on the Railways, for the year 2024-25 (for the year 
ending 31stMarch, 2025). 
(b) Statement giving reason s for the delay in laying the paper mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6184/18/26] 
I. Report and Accounts (2024-25) of RINL, Visakhapatnam and related papers  
II. MoU between the Govt. of India and the Bridge and Roof Co. (India) Ltd. for the 
year 2025-26 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF STEEL (SHRI BHUPATHI RAJU 
SRINIVASA VARMA): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
I .   ( 1 )     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(a) Forty-third Annual Report and Account s of   the   Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited (RINL), Visakhapatnam, Andh ra Pradesh, for the year 2024-25, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
  (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) gi ving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6161/18/26] 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
II.    A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Memorandum of Understanding between the 
Government of India (Ministry of Heavy Industries) and the Bridge and Roof Co. 
(India) Ltd., for the year 2025-26. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6162/18/26] 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Textiles 
II. Reports and Accounts (2024-25) of NHDC, Noida;  WWEPC, New Delhi;  SITRA, 
Coimbatore;  PDEXCIL, Mumbai;  and  TEXPROCIL, Mumbai  and related 
papers  
वÎतर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पिबतर् मागȃिरटा): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ –   
I.  (i)   A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Textiles Notification No. S.O. 
6138(E)., dated the 31 st December, 2025, amending the Principal Notification No. 
S.O. 1830(E), dated the 22 nd April, 2025, under sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the 
Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987.   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6171/18/26] 
       (ii)   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Textiles, under Section 13B of the Central Silk Board Act, 1948:- 
(1) S.O. 6140(E)., dated the 31 st December, 2025, notifying the nomination of 
the person, as mentioned therein, to serve as Member of the Central Silk 
Board for a period of three years from the date of this notification. 
(2) S.O. 169(E)., dated the 12 th January, 2026, notifying the nomination of the 
member of Rajya Sabha, as mentioned th erein, having been duly elected to 
be Member of the Central Silk Board for a period of three years w.e.f. 
18.12.2025 or till completion of his term in Rajya Sabha, whichever is earlier. 
(3) S.O. 350(E)., dated the 22 nd January, 2026, notifying the nomination of 
Officers, as mentioned therein, to serve as Member of the Central Silk Board 
for a period of three years from the date of this notification. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (3), see No. L.T. 6170/18/26] 
II.  (A)  (1) A copy each (i n English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
5

 
 
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(a) Forty-second Annual Report and Accounts of the National Handloom 
Development Corporation Limited (NHDC) , Noida, Uttar Pradesh, for the  
year 2024-25, together with   the Au ditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
  (2)  Statement (in English and Hindi) gi ving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6169/18/26] 
 (B)    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i) (a) Sixtieth Annual Report and A ccounts of the Wool &Woollens Export 
Promotion Council (WWEPC), New Delhi, for the year 2024-25, together 
with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the paper mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6164/18/26] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the South India Textile Research 
Association (SITRA), Coimbatore, Ta mil Nadu, for the year 2024-25, 
together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the paper mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6164/18/26] 
(iii) (a) Thirtieth Annual Report and Accounts of the Powerloom Development 
and Export Promotion Council (PDEXCIL), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for 
the year 2024-25, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Statement by Minister, Shri Jitin Prasada. 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
Status of implementation of the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary   
Standing Committee on Commerce 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA) : Sir, I lay  a statement regarding status of 
implementation of the Observations/Re commendations contained in the One 
Hundred Eighty-eighth Report of the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Commerce on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Eighty-seventh Report on ‘Comprehensive  Strategy to Map Major Products and 
Countries to Maximise Exports and Minimise Imports’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6156/18/26] 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Matters Raised with Permission.  Shri Subhash Barala.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6163/18/26] 
(iv) (a) Seventy-first Annual Report an d Accounts of the Cotton Textiles Export 
Promotion Council (TEXPROCIL), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 
2024-25, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6165/18/26] 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
7

 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to say something.   
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, no .  … ( Interruptions)…  No disturbance, please.  
…(Interruptions)…  Subhash Barala ji, please speak.  
Ǜी सुभाष बराला )हिरयाणा(:  सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I have a point of order.   …(Interruptions)…  
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka): Mr. Chairman, Sir, this is… …( Interruptions)…  
 SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal) : Sir, this is very important. 
…(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, no.  After this … …(Interruptions)…  Raise it after this.  
…(Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on record excep t Shri Subhash Barala’s Zero Hour 
submission. …(Interruptions)…  
  
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
Need to curb ultra-processed foods to protect children’s health and build a strong 
foundation for a developed India 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला (हिरयाणा):  सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का 
अवसर िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  माननीय सभापित महोदय, भारतीय सÆयता ने भोजन को कभी 
केवल उपभोग की वÎतु नहीं माना। ...(Ëयवधान)... हमारे िलए अन्न संÎकार था, िवज्ञान था और 
संतुलन था। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... माँ के हाथ का सादा भोजन, मौसमी अनाज, दालȂ, लÎसी, दही और 
मोटे अनाज ही वे आधार रहे हȅ, िजन्हȗने पीिढ़यȗ तक भारत को ÎवÎथ, Ǜमशील और आत्मिनभर्र 
बनाए रखा। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज िÎथित बदल रही है। ...(Ëयवध ान)... बच्चे पैकेट वाले, मीठे और 
नमकीन खाǏ पदाथș के आदी हो रहे हȅ, िजससे वे भरपेट तो खा रहे हȅ, लेिकन पोिषत नहीं हो पा 
रहे हȅ। पिरणामÎवरूप मोटापा, डायिबटीज़ और अन्य बीमािरयाँ तेजी से बढ़ रही हȅ। हर चार मȂ से 
एक वयÎक Ģी-डायिबिटक या डायिबिटक है और बच्चȗ मȂ मो
टापा िंचताजनक Îतर पर पहुँचने 
की तरफ बढ़ रहा है। अÊटर्ा ĢोसेÎड फूड मȂ पोषण कम और चीनी, नमक व अÎवÎथ वसा अिधक 
होती है। इन्हȂ बच्चȗ को आकिर्षत करने के िलए जानबूझकर इस तरह Ģचािरत िक
या जाता है िक 
वे लत बन जाएँ। इससे हमारे बच्चे उपभोƪा नहीं, बिÊक बाजार बनते जा रहे हȅ। यह केवल 
ÎवाÎथ्य का नहीं, बिÊक िवकिसत भारत की नींव का ĢÌन है। अÎवÎथ बच्चे भिवÍय मȂ मजबूत 
कायर्बल नहीं बन पाएँगे और देश पर ÎवाÎथ्य खचर् का बोझ बढ़ेगा। इसिलए सरकार से आगर्ह है 
िक बच्चȗ को लिक्षत िव
ज्ञापनȗ पर रोक लगे, हर पैकेट पर ÎपÍट चेतावनी लेबल हो, Îकूलȗ व 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
आंगनवािडयȗ मȂ पारÇपिरक और मोटे अनाज को बढ़ावा िदया जाए तथा ईट राइट इंिडया और 
िमलेट्स िमशन को मजबूत िकया जाए।                                                              
मान्यवर, अमेिरकन साइंिटÎट की एक िरसचर् के आधार पर एक पेपर पिÅलश हुआ है।  यह 
पेपर एिडक्शन साइंस, पिÅलक हेÊथ िहÎटर्ी और पॉिलसी से सबूतȗ को िम लाकर िदखाता है िक 
िकतने अÊटर्ा-ĢोसेÎड फूड्स को जान बूझकर उसी इंडÎटर्ी Ãलेबुक का इÎतेमाल करके  बनाया 
गया था, िजससे मॉडनर् िसगरेट बनी।  इसके  कारण यह बच्चȗ के अंदर लत बनती जा रहा है।  
यूनाइटेड िंक
गडम के उदाहरण से हमȂ सीख लेते हुए भारत मȂ भी कड़े िनयम बनाने चािहए। ÎवÎथ 
बच्चे ही िवकिसत भारत की मजबूत नहीं है।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shri Subhash Barala: Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra),   Shri R.  Girirajan (Tam il Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),   Dr.  Me dha  Vishram   Kulkarni (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhy a Pradesh), Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
(Rajasthan), Shri Banshilal Gur
jar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar),     
Shri Kanad Purkayastha (Assam), Dr. Anil Su khdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra),       
Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Dr. Meenakshi Jain (Nominated), Dr. Sumer Singh 
Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Lahar Sing h Siroya (Karnataka), Shri Ram Chander 
Jangra (Haryana), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia (Gujarat), Shri Dorjee Tshering 
Lepcha (Sikkim), Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy (Andhra Pradesh), Shri Devendra 
Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh) and Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Ta navade (Goa).                       
(Ends)   
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal) :  Sir, I am on a point of order. 
...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal):  Sir, Mr. Gokhale has a point to make. 
...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shriman Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade. 
Concern over rising cyber frauds targeting tourists in Goa and  
other tourist destinations 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa) : Thank you Mr. Chairman, Sir, 
for giving me this opportunity to raise an im portant issue. I rise to draw the attention 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
9

 
 
of this august House to the growing menace of cyber frauds targeting tourists in major 
tourist destinations, such as Goa and several other States. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I have a point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are always disturbing. Please sit down. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Sir, he is on a point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You know, the Chairman ’s ruling is final. Please sit  
down. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE: Sir, in recent years, Goa emerged as a 
major tourist hub and also attracted digital nomads and remote workers.  While this 
has helped the local economy, it has, unfort unately, led to sharp rise in online scams 
relating to hotel, accommodation bookings  and digital payments. There have been 
several cases where fake hotels, ho liday homes, home-stays and other 
accommodation are listed on online platforms.  Fraudsters also cr eate fake websites 
in the name of well known hotels or booking portals.  Tourists fall prey to these scams 
and, on reaching Goa, discover that no such booking exist or that hotel itself does not 
exist. This not only ruins the family holid ay but also causes heavy financial losses as 
they are made to pay large advance am ount. Despite regular advisories, these 
fraudsters continue to resurface using fake websites, virtual mobile numbers, 
international internet calls and anonymous di gital platforms.  Advisory warnings alone 
are not sufficient to deal with these organized gangs. There is an urgent need for strict 
measures. Tourist-related websites should  be allowed to operate only after KYC 
verification.  Websites, without verified cred entials, should be identified, blocked and 
immediately banned.  Chairman, Sir, this is  a serious issue, affecting tourist safety, 
causing financial losses running into hun dreds of crores and damaging Goa’s 
reputation as a safe tourist destination. 
 In today’s digital age, protecting tourists online is as important as ensuring 
their physical safety.  Protecting digital safety of tourists is essential to safeguard 
India’s tourism economy and our global image.  Chairman, Sir, I urge the Government 
to take strong action by enforcing strict norms and ensuring real-time monitoring and 
takedown of fraudulent platforms.  Thank you.                                    
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade: Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (O disha), Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Meenakshi Jain (Nominated),   
Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Sh ri Kanad Purkayastha (Assam) and   
Shrimati Maya Narolia (Madhya Pradesh).                                                   
Need for strengthening road safety infrastructure for Persons with Disabilities 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश):  माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे Zero Hour मȂ 
बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करती हूं और सदन को Ģणाम करती 
हूं।  महोदय, मȅ िवकिसत भारत की ओर हमारी यातर्ा के एक अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर सदन का 
ध्यान आकिर्षत कराना चाहती हूँ। सुगÇय  फुटपाथ न केवल िदËयांगजनȗ का अिधकार है, बिÊक 
पयार्वरण संरक्षण का सश
ƪ माध्यम भी है। सुगÇय भारत अिभयान के अंतगर्त हमारी सरकार ने 
ऐितहािसक कायर् िकए हȅ, िंकतु हमारे शहरȗ मȂ आज भी लाÎट माइल कनेिक्टिवटी एक गंभीर 
चुनौती बनी हुई है।  िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ हा
उिंसग एंड अबर्न अफेयसर् के 2021 के िदशा-िनदȃशȗ मȂ 1200 
से लेकर 1800 एमएम चौड़ाई, 1.12 रैÇप ढलान और टैक्सटाइल पेिंवग के ÎपÍट मानक हȅ।  िफर 
भी ऑिडट बताते हȅ िक 95 परसȂट शहरी मागș पर आज भी बाधाएं बनी हुई हȅ, िजससे वे Ëहील 
चेयर का उ
पयोग कर जान जोिखम मȂ डालकर मुख्य सड़क पार करने को मजबूर हȅ।  
िदËयांगजनȗ के कायर्बल से बाहर रहने के कारण देश को सालाना लगभ
ग 17.9 लाख करोड़ का 
नुकसान भी हो रहा है।  2023 मȂ 35,000 से अिधक पैदल याितर्यȗ की मृत्यु हुई है। गंभीर िंचता का 
िवषय यह है िक हम एक डेटा Ãलैन्ड Îपॉट का सामना भी कर रहे हȅ।  हमारे दुघर्टना आंकड़ȗ मȂ 
एनसीआरबी और िमिन
Îटर्ी ऑफ रोड टर्ांसपोटर् एंड हाईवे सामान्य पैदल याितर्यȗ और 
िदËयांगजनȗ के बीच मȂ कोई अंतर भी नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ। यिद टूटे हुए फुटप ाथ के कारण कोई 
Ëहीलचेयर उपयोगकतार् या नेतर्हीन Ëयिƪ दुघर्टना का िशकार होता है, तो उसे केवल पैदल यातर्ी 
दुघर्टना के रूप मȂ दजर् िकया जाता है। पैदल याितर्यȗ की मृत्यु मȂ 7.7 Ģितशत की वृिǉ को देखते 
हुए इस डाटा के अंतर को बांटना आवÌयक है।  
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, हमारी सरकार िदËयांगज
न भाई-बहनȗ के िलए बहुत कुछ कर 
रही है। उनके  िलए िदËयांग मेले भी लग रहे हȅ, हम उन्हȂ रोजग ार से भी जोड़ रहे हȅ, लेिकन इसके  
साथ ही मȅ सरकार से कुछ िडमांड्स करना चाहूंगी। सबसे पहले सड़क दुघर्टना डाटा मȂ 
िदËयांगता िÎथित का एक कॉलम अलग से जोड़ा जाए, तािक जोिखमȗ का सही आकलन हो सके।  
सभी िनमार्ण कायȘ मȂ िम
िनÎटर्ी ऑफ हाउिंसग एंड अबर्न अफेयसर् मȂ िदËयांगता के जो 2021 के  
मानक हȅ, उनका कड़ाई से पालन सुिनिÌचत िकया जाए। इसके  साथ ही, हमȂ यह सुिनिÌचत 
करना होगा िक संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 21 के अनुसार जो सबको जीवन का अि
धकार है, उसमȂ हम 
अपने िदËयांगजन भाई-बहनȗ को अलग से तवज्जो दȂ। धन्यवाद। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sang eeta Yadav:  Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr . Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra), 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
11

 
 
Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala),  Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Subhash 
Barala (Haryana), Shrimati S. Phangnon  Konyak (Nagaland), Dr. Kavita Patidar 
(Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttar akhand), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepc ha(Sikkim), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai 
Dholakia (Gujarat), Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla(Nominated) and Shri Sadanand 
Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa).     
Now, Shrimati Sumitra Balmik.   
Demand for 45-Day Paid Elderly Wellness Leave to support India’s senior citizens 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आज इस सदन के माध्यम से एक 
ऐसे िवषय पर आपका ध्यान कȂिदर्त करना चाहती हूं, जो हमारी सांÎकृितक िवरासत और 
िवकिसत भारत की आधुिनक जनसांिख्यकीय सच्चाइयȗ के बी च एक सेतु का काम करता है। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, हमारी संÎकृित मȂ कहा गया है िक:    
"उनके  होने भर से सभी मुिÌकलȂ दूर हो जाती हȅ, 
माता-िपता वो भगवान हȅ, िजनके  आगे हर दुआ मंजूर हो जाती है।" 
 
 महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी के दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार युवाओं और मिहलाओं के 
उत्थान के ऐितहािसक कदम उठा रही है। लेिकन अब मुझे एक और बात कहने का समय आ गया 
है िक िजस Ģकार से 'सȅडिवच पीढ़ी' मौन पुकार कर रही है, वे अपनी नौक
री की जरूरतȗ की 
वजह से अपनी नौकरी और अपने माता-िपता की सेवा के नैितक कतर्Ëय के बीच मȂ झूल रहे हȅ। 
महोदय, सबसे अिधक युवा शि
ƪ होते हुए भी इस वषर् 2026 मȂ  भारत मȂ विरÍठ नागिरकȗ की 
संख्या 14.9 करोड़ से अिधक हो गयी है। 2036 तक  यह आंकड़ा 23 करोड़  को पार कर जाएगा। 
जÊद ही हर तीसरा भारतीय बुजुगर् होगा। तीĨ शहरीकरण और रोजगार के कारण क रोड़ȗ युवा 
गृह नगरȗ से िवÎथािपत होकर दूर बस गए हȅ। पीछे रह गए हȅ, तो उनके  बुजुगर् माता-िपता। जब 
हर घर मȂ बुजुगș को िकसी मेिडकल इमरजȂसी की, सामान्य देखभाल की जरूरत होती है, तो एक 
शारीिरक उपि
Îथित बहुत जरूरी होती है - या तो उनका बेटा या उनकी बेटी। जब वे ऑिफस से 
छुƺी लेने के िलए परेशान होते हȅ, तो उन्हȂ छुƺी नहीं िमलती है। 'िसÊवर इकोनॉमी' तेजी से बढ़ 
रही है, लेिकन इस इकोि
सÎटम की सफलता के िलए यह जरूरी है िक उनकी Ģाथिमक देखभाल 
के िलए बेटे या बेटी का होना बहुत जरूरी है। वे छुƺी के िलए परेशान होते हȅ।  
 महोदय, मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करना चाहत ी हूं िक मातृत्व (Maternity), िपतृत्व 
(Paternity) और अध्ययन अवकाश (Study Leave) की तजर् पर सरकारी और िनजी, दोनȗ क्षेतर्ȗ 
मȂ 45 िदनȗ का 'सशुÊक वृǉजन कÊयाण अवकाश' बहुत आवÌयक है। महोदय, यह अवकाश 60 
वषर् से अिधक आयु के माता-िपता के िलए गंभीर बीमारी के कारण उन पिरव ारȗ मȂ उन बच्चȗ को 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
िमलना चािहए। महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहती हूँ िक जैसे एक मां 20 वषर् अपने बच्चे को पालने मȂ देती 
है, उसी तरह एक पुतर् को भी छुƺी िमलनी चािहए। मȅ कहना चाहती हूं: 
"िदल की गहराइयȗ से एक सबक सीखा है, 
िबना मां-बाप क े सारा जीवन फीका है।" 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associat
ed themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sumitr a Balmik:  Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Na du), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),    
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu (Nominated), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha),  Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Na du), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Dr. Sumer 
Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalp ana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Banshilal 
Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh),   
Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri  Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), 
Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel(Bihar), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia (Gujarat),  
Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha(Sikkim), Dr . Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Maya 
Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra) 
Now, Shri Ramji Lal Suman.   
Concern over the inadequate conservation of national heritage sites in the country 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित जी, अभी राÍटर्पित जी के अिभभाषण मȂ सरकार 
ने Ģितबǉता दोहराई थी िक सरकार देश की सांÎकृितक धर ोहरȗ को सहेजने और संवारने का 
काम करेगी, लेिकन लगता यह है िक सरकार हमारे सांÎकृितक धरोहरȗ को नÍट करने का काम 
कर रही है। सभापित जी, अभी हाल मȂ बनारस मȂ मिणकिर्णका घाट है, वहां पर लगी हुई 
अिलयाबाई होÊकर की मूिर्त और तमाम मंिदर बुलडोजर लगा कर ध्व
Îत कर िदए गए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, नहीं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित महोदय, इनको चुप कराइए।  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please address the Chair. 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित महोदय, काशी हमारी सांÎकृितक धरोहर है।  सबसे महत्वपूणर् 
सवाल यह है िक समाजवादी पाटीर् के राÍटर्ीय अध्यक्ष, Ǜी अिखलेश यादव जी ने वहां हालात का 
जायजा लेने के िलए एक Ģितिनिधमंडल भेजा था। ...(Ëयवधान )... उǄर Ģदेश की  
सरकार ने ...(Ëयवधान)...   
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
13

 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, नहीं। Except hon. Member’s speech, nothing else will go on  
record.  …(Interruptions)…   Don’t shout.   
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश की सरकार ने उस Ģितिनिधमंडल को वहां 
जाने से रोक िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please address the Chair …(Interruptions)…    
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सीधा-सीधा अपने गुनाहȗ पर एक पदार् डालने के िलए,  सरकार  ने उस 
Ģितिनिधमंडल को वहां नहीं जाने िदया। 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please address the Chair …(Interruptions)…    
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित महोदय, मȅ सबसे पहले लोकमाता अिहÊयाबाई होलकर जी की 
Îमृित को Ģणाम करता हूं।  लोकमाता अिहÊयाबाई होलकर जी को जो लोग अपना वंशज मानते 
हȅ, जैसे- पाल, बघेल, धनगर इत्यािद लोग हȅ, लेिकन पूरे देश और दुिनया मȂ लोकमाता 
अिहÊयाबाई होलकर जी के शासन को लोग याद करते हȅ।   
सभापित महोदय, सबसे बड़ा सवाल यह है िक लोकमाता अिहÊयाबाई ने 1767 से  लेकर 
1795 तक शासन िकया और अपनी राजधानी इंदौर से बदल करके  महेÌवर कर दी।  उन्हȗने बहुत 
से मंिदर बनवाए और बहुत से मंिदरȗ का जीणȘǉार कराया, घाट बनवाए, कुएं बनवाए, तालाब 
बनवाए और तमाम धमर्शालाओं का िनमार्ण िकया।  इसके  साथ ही, उन्हȗने अयोध्या, काशी, 
मथुरा, हिरǎार, उज्जैन, ǎारका, नािसक और सोमनाथ आिद के मंिदरȗ को उन्हȗने पुन: Îथािपत 
िकया।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ उÊलेख करना चाहूंगा िक लोकमाता अिहÊयाबाई होलकर के शासन 
के बारे मȂ एनी बेसȂट ǎारा िलिखत अपनी िकताब "Children of the Motherland",  इितहासकार 
गोिंवद सखाराम ǎारा 1933 मȂ िलिखत अपनी िकताब " The Main Currents of Maratha 
History", 1849 के 'बंगाल गेजेट' तथा पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू जी ने जो िकताब "Discovery 
of India" िलखी थी ...(Ëयवधान)...                                                                   
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Ramji Lal Su man:  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Nira njan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Gurwinder Singh 
Oberoi (Jammu & Kashmir), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil  Nadu), Shri Imran Pratapga rhi (Maharashtra),      
Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala),  Shri Javed Ali Khan (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Jaya 
Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra) and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).   
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Ǜीमाâ Ǜी िमथलेश कुमार जी।  
Concern over the menace of stray animals in Uttar Pradesh 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे Zero Hour मȂ अपनी बात रखने 
का जो मौका िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत आभार Ģकट करता हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी सभापित: आप बैिठए, Ãलीज़।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: महोदय, मȅ सदन के माध्यम से ...(Ëयवधा
न)... 
Ǜी सभापित: िमथलेश कुमार जी, आप बोिलए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे Zero Hour मȂ बोलने का जो अवसर 
िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत आभार Ģकट करता हूं। सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से उǄर Ģदेश के एक अत्यंत गंभीर और जनिहत से जुड़े िवषय की ओर इस सदन का 
ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहत
ा हूं।  वह िवषय है - Ģदेश मȂ सड़कȗ, खेतȗ और गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बड़ी 
संख्या मȂ घूम रहे छुƺा पशुओं की समÎया।   
माननीय सभ
ापित महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश एक कृिष Ģधान राज्य है।  आज Ģदेश के अनेक 
जनपदȗ मȂ छुƺा गोवंश िकसानȗ की फसलȗ को भारी नुकसान पहुंचा रहे हȅ। केवल कृिष ही नहीं, 
यह समÎया अब सड़क सुरक्षा से भी जुड़ चुकी है।  राÍटर्ीय एवं राज्
य राजमागș पर छुƺा पशुओं के 
कारण आए िदन दुघर्टनाएं हो रही हȅ, िजनमȂ िनदȘष नागिरकȗ की जानȂ जा रही हȅ।  शहर ी और 
गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ यह एक गंभीर चुनौती बनी हुई है। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, हमारे देश के माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और 
उǄर Ģदेश के यशÎवी मुख्य मंतर्ी माननीय Ǜी योगी आिदत्यनाथ जी के नेतृत्व मȂ गो-संरक्षण एवं 
गो-कÊयाण की िदशा मȂ अनेक सराहनीय Ģयास िकए गए हȅ।  Ģदेश मȂ गो-आǛय Îथल Îथािपत 
िकए गए हȅ तथा इनके  संचालन हेतु धनरािश भी उपलÅध कराई जा रही है।  इसके  बावजूद 
जमीनी Îत
र पर इस समÎया का पूणर् समाधान अभी एक बहुत बड़ी चुनौती बना हुआ है, जबिक 
गौवंशȗ से उत्पन्न होने वाला गोबर कृिष क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् खाद का काम करता है।  इससे 
रासायिनक खादȗ की खपत मȂ 50 Ģितशत  की कमी हो जाती है, जबिक वह गोबर सड़कȗ पर 
िततर-िवतर होकर के इधर-उधर चला जाता है।   
महोदय, मȅ कृिष के उपज बढ़ाने के िलए इस गोबर की खाद को अत्यंत महत्व पूणर् मानता 
हूं।  इसिलए मȅ आपसे एक िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक जो गौपालकȗ को वेतन िमलता है, वह 
अिधकािरयȗ के ǎारा उनको समय पर नहीं िदया जाता, इसिलए गौपालक गौ-आǛय छोड़कर 
चले जाते हȅ।  मȅ सरकार से मांग करूंगा िक इस िवषय को गंभीरता से लेते हुए, वहां पर गोपालकȗ 
की Îथायी रूप से िनयुिƪ करने की कोई ËयवÎथा की जाए।  यह केवल एक राज्य का ही नहीं, 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
15

 
 
बिÊक पूरे Ģदेश के गर्ामीण समाज और कृिष ËयवÎथा से जुड़ा हुआ िवषय है।  मुझे आशा है िक इस 
िवषय को गंभीरता से लेते हुए, सरकार आवÌयक कदम उठाएगी।  जय िहन्द!  धन्यवाद।                                     
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised b y  t h e  h o n .  M e m b e r ,  S h r i  M i t h l e s h  K u m a r :   S h r i  R .  G i r i r a j a n  ( T a m i l  N a d u ) ,  
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Javed Ali Khan  (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri mati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), 
Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh) and Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya 
Pradesh).                                                                                    
 Need for enhancement of air connectivity and flight operations at Belagavi Airport in 
Karnataka 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी (कनार्टक): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ सदन का ध्यान कणार्टक की दूसरी 
राजधानी, बेलगावी मȂ िÎथत हवाई अƿे से संबंिधत मुǈे की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ।  इसका 
िनमार्ण 1942 मȂ रॉयल एयरफोसर् के ǎार ा िकया गया था।  बेलगावी कणार्टक, महाराÍटर् और गोवा, 
तीन राज्यȗ की सीमा पर िÎथत होने के कारण अत्यंत संवेदनशील और महत्वपूणर् है।  बेलगावी 
एक बड़ा रक्षा कȂदर् है।  यहाँ मराठा लाइट इंफȂटर्ी, आईटीबीपी, कमांडो टर्ेिंनग सȂटर और एयरफोसर् 
िÎथत हȅ।  देश की रक्ष
ा करने वाले हजारȗ जवान, Ģिशक्षणाथीर् और अिधकारी लगातार यहाँ की 
यातर्ा करते हȅ।  बेलगावी एक एजुकेशनल, मेिडकल और इंडिÎटर्यल हब है।  कȂदर् सरकार यहाँ 
एयरपोटर् की इंģाÎटर्क्चर बढ़ाने के िल ए 262.64 करोड़ रुपए की लागत से नई एयरपोटर् टिर्मनल 
िबिंÊडग और 25.98 करोड़  रुपए से एĢन का िवÎतार कर रही है।  उड़ान-3 योजना के तहत 
बेलगावी को फाइव एयरलाइंस के माध्यम से 13 शहरȗ से जोड़ने का काम चल रहा था, लेिकन 
आज िÎथित यह है िक केवल दो एयरलाइंस बची हुई हȅ और कनेिक्टिवटी िसफर्  फाइव शहरȗ तक 
सीिमत रह गई हȅ।   
बेलगावी हवाई अƿा से वषर् 2024
-25 मȂ 3,40,300 याितर्यȗ ने सफर िकया, जो िपछले वषर् 
की तुलना मȂ लगभग 9 Ģितशत की बढ़ोतरी है।  इतनी भारी माँग के बावजूद एयरलाइंस उड़ान 
बंद कर रही है।  एयरलाइंस केवल तब तक सेवा देती है, जब तक उन्हȂ सरकार से वायिबिलटी 
गैप फंिंडग या सिÅसडी िमलत
ी है, जैसे ही सिÅसडी की अविध खत्म होती है, वह उड़ान बंद कर 
देती है।  उड़
ान योजना की सिÅसडी समाÃत होने के बाद भी इन रूट्स पर याितर्यȗ की संख्या कम 
नहीं थी।  मुंबई, िदÊली, बȂगलुरु और हैदराबाद रूट पर लोड फैक्टर 85 परसȂट से 95 परसȂट तक 
था।  जब Äलाइट्स 90 परसȂट से अिधक क्षमता के साथ चल रही थी और िबना सिÅसडी के भी 
मुनाफा दे रही थी, तो ए
यरलाइंस ǎारा सिर्वस बंद करना गलत है, इसिलए मेरी सरकार से माँग 
है िक नागिरक उƿयन मंतर्ालय उन ए यरलाइंस पर सख्त कारर्वाई करे, जो हाईलोड फैक्टर होने 
के बावजूद केवल सिÅसडी खत्म होने पर रूट्स बंद कर देती है।  रक्षा वाले और आम नागिरक की 
सुिवधा के िलए मुंबई, पुणे, चेन्नई, इंदौर और जयपुर जैसे शहरȗ की उड़ा न तत्काल बहाल की 
जाए और यह सुिनिÌचत की जाए िक बेलगावी की कनेिक्टिवटी बनी रहे।  धन्यवाद। 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon . Member, Shri Iranna Kadadi : Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri A . A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri R . Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),           
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra).                                   
Demand for construction of flyover or underground passage to protect elephant and 
wildlife corridors in the foothill areas of North Bengal 
SHRI NAGENDRA RAY (West Bengal): Sir, I would like to bring to your notice that 
the corridor from Russia to Africa via China, Myanmar, Bharat, Bhutan, Nepal, 
Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Jordan and Israel is the longest corridor in the 
world. Out of this stretch, Alipurduar to S iliguri is the main corridor covering national 
sanctuaries like Jaldapara-Chilapata, Garuma ra National Park, Baikunthapur forest, 
Mahananda wildlife sanctuary used by elephants from era to era. The hill is situated to 
the north of this corridor and to the south is density of population. So, in between 
these areas, the main elephant corridor is situated. But, developmental activities like 
construction of railway tracks, national high ways, etc. have been gradually leading to 
the destruction of elephants and other animal s which is detrimental to the Wild Life 
Protection Act, 1972. It is very regrettable to say that 41  elephants have died on the 
168-kilometre long way from New Jalpaiguri  Junction to Alipurduar Junction since 
2004 and, furthermore, a large number of elephants, including calves, have died 
during the last few years. There are estima ted 488 elephants which have been facing 
serious threat from increasing growth of human population. India still holds population 
of around 27,000 elephants as per the Government of India data in 2017. North Bengal 
has a total of 3,306 square kilometres forest area, out of which 2,000 square 
kilometres is considered as elephant habita t. But, today, this corridor is congested 
and occupied by human beings.  I, ther efore, request the Union Government to 
construct either flyover or underpass for human beings without any disturbance to 
elephants and other animals for their free movement. Thank you.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shri Nagendra Ray:  Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),          
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), Shrimati Maya 
Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai 
Dholakia (Gujarat), Shri Harsh Vardhan Sh ringla (Nominated), Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
(Nominated), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odish a) and Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
(Maharashtra).           
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
17

 
 
Shri R. Girirajan.  
Need for reduction of interest rates on Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and REC 
loans to alleviate financial stress on Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution 
Corporation (TANGEDCO) 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu):  Thank you hon. Chairman, Sir, for giving me this 
opportunity to speak on this subject.  Th e Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution 
Corporation (TANGEDCO) operates and ma nages various power projects in Tamil 
Nadu, with a significant total installed cap acity of over 45,000 MW.  TANGEDCO is 
one of the best DISCOMs in the country.  As the sole distributor of electricity in Tamil 
Nadu, TANGEDCO ensures that electrici ty reaches homes, businesses, and 
industries efficiently.  TANGEDCO has cons istently urged Central financing agencies 
like Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and RE C Limited to reduce interest rates on 
loans to ease their business and improve their financial position.  The Government of 
Tamil Nadu has urged REC and PFC to re duce the interest rate on TANGEDCO’s 
loans to 8 per cent, noting that continuo us efforts had already reduced the annual 
interest cost to around 10.5 per cent.  Hi gh interest rates (ranging from 9.5 per cent 
to 12.65 per cent) have forced TANGEDCO  to pay approximately Rs.7,000 crore in 
interest annually on loans from Central in stitutions, which a rate reduction could 
significantly decrease.  TANGEDCO has been  working on restructuring its debt and 
improving financial performa nce, including improving its ranking to secure better 
terms,   with   a   projection to break even  within three financial years. The Tamil Nadu 
Government continued to call for a reduction of PFC/REC loan interest rates by at 
least 1.5 per cent and a new comprehensive debt restructuring scheme.  I,  therefore, 
urge the Union Government to reduce interest rates on loans from PFC and REC by at 
least 1.5 per cent to alleviate the financ ial strains and for the development of 
TANGEDCO, Tamil Nadu. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shri R. Girirajan:    Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Meda 
Raghunadha Reddy (Andhra Pradesh), Shri Go lla Baburao (Andhra Pradesh),       
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
Now,  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde. 
 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Need for continuity of life-saving treatment for patients with Lysosomal  
Storage Disorders 
 
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्): आदरणीय सभापित महोदय,  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी 
नरेन्दर् मोदी  जी तथा ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी, Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा जी ने मानवीय ÎवाÎथ्य हेतु जो कदम 
उठाए हȅ, उसके  िलए मȅ उनका आपके  माध्यम से अिभनंदन करता हूँ, आभार Ëयƪ कर ता हूँ।   
 सर, वषर् 2021 से  पहले rare disease के बारे मȂ कोई policy नहीं थी।  वषर् 2021 मȂ  
National Policy for the Rare Disease Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा Îथािपत की गई और उसके  माध्यम 
से पूरे भारत मȂ Centres of Excellence िनिर्मत हुए।  इन rare diseases मȂ Lysosomal Storage 
Disorder, यानी Gauche r, Pompe, Fabry, MPS, ऐसे disorders के िलए 50 लाख रुपये Ģित 
रूग्ण बालक िदए जाते हȅ और उन बच्चȗ की enzymes replacement therapy की जाती है।  यह 
थेरेपी life-long life saving therapy है, िजसकी वजह से बच्चे की गर्ोथ अच्छी होती है, उसका 
mental retardation रुकता है, लेिकन इस पॉिलसी मȂ कुछ सुधार कर न े के िलए मȅ इस िवषय को 
ज़ीरो ऑवर मȂ उठा रहा हूँ।  हालांिक Centres of Excellence भी Government के  हȅ, िजनमȂ 
Government की ओर से treatment होती है, लेिकन 50 लाख खत्म होने के बाद जब 
discontinuation of treatment हो जाती है, तो बच्चȗ को relapse आता है और उनकी जान जाने 
की संभावना रहती है।  लेिकन पचास लाख रुपये खत्म होने के बाद उनका िडÎकंिटन्यूएशन ऑफ 
टर्ीटमȂट हो जाता है, िजससे बच्चȗ को िरलैÃस आत
ा है और उनकी जान जाने की संभावना रहती 
है। जो पैसे अलॉट िकए गए थे, उसमȂ से बचे हुए हȅ। इसिलए मेरी सरकार से िवनत ी है िक इन 
बच्चȗ को लाइफ-लॉन्ग एंजाइम िरÃलेसमȂट थेरेपी िमले और इसीिलए पचास लाख रुपये का जो 
कैप है, उसे हटाने की मȅ िवनती करता हूँ। 
इसके  अलावा एक पोटर्ल भी बनाया गय
ा है, िजसमȂ सीएसआर फंिंडग या कोर फंिंडग का 
Ģावधान है। उस कोर फंिंडग को चालू करके  इन बच्चȗ का, जो हजारȗ की संख्या मȂ हȅ, 
रिजÎटर्ेशन िकया जाए और उन्हȂ लॉन्ग-टमर्, अनइंटरÃटेड एंजाइम िरÃ
लेसमȂट थेरेपी िमलनी 
चािहए। जो फंड सȂटर ऑफ एक्सीलȂस को िदया गया है, उस सȂटर ऑफ एक्सीलȂस को 
गाइडलाइंस और एसओपी देकर उस फंड का टाइमली और कंटीन्यूअस यूिटलाइजेशन िकया 
जाए। जो दूर-दराज़ से आने वाले बच्चे हȅ, उन्हȂ सȂटर ऑफ एक्सीलȂस मȂ रहना पड़ता है, तािक 
उन्हȂ समय पर एंजाइम िरÃलेसमȂट थेरेपी िमल सके  और िकसी भी बच्चे की जान न जाए। इसी 
उǈेÌय से मȅ आज यह ज़ीरो आवर उठा रहा हूँ। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Member
s associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde : Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),         
Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), Shri Banshilal Gurjar  (Madhya Prades h),           
Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Dr . Bhim Singh (Bihar), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha) and Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra).    
   
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
19

 
 
Now, Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba. 
Demand for establishment of assembly units of electronic/electrical garments  
PSU in Manipur 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA (Manipur): Mr. Chairman, Sir, my Zero 
Hour Submission is, ‘Demand for establishment of assembly units of 
electronic/electrical garments PSU in Manipur’.   Sir,  Manipur is a small landlocked 
State with an estimated population of abou t 30 lakh-plus only. As of now, the State 
has no big industrial corporate house,  and only small and very few medium 
enterprises are functioning in the State.  The literacy rate, as per latest population 
Census, is 76.94 per cent. The State's annua l unemployment rate is 4.7 per cent (as 
of 2022-2023), while the national average is 3.2 per cent.   As such, unemployment in 
the productive age group and educated unemployed category is rampant in the State, 
but the State has abundance of skillful, young generation having degrees or diplomas 
in electronic/ electrical/computer  and other engineering branches.   To meet the job 
demand of this young educated generation , I urge upon the Union Government to 
sanction assembly units of Public Sector  Undertaking (PSU) in electronic/electrical 
ready-made garments in the Stat e.  If found worthwhile, small 
electronic/electrical/computer parts could be manufactured to provide employment 
opportunities and boost the State economy as  well as save the youths from drug 
menace and involve in national building. Thank you, Sir.                       
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Maharaja  Sanajaoba Leishemba: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Gulam Ali (Nominated), Shri Kanad Purkayastha (Assam), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu).   
  Now, Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan. 
Concern over shortage of qualified special needs educators and its impact on 
inclusive education in the country 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN (Uttar Pradesh) : S i r ,  I  w i s h  t o  d r a w  t h e  
urgent attention of this House to the crisis of acute shortage of qualified special needs 
educators in India. For millions of children wi th disabilities, it is a daily struggle for 
inclusive education.  Today, nearly 50 per cen t of children with learning disabilities 
dropout before completing class 10. There is roughly one registered special educator 
for every 18 to 20 students with special n eeds enrolled in schools nationwide. As per 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
the WHO guidelines, the requir ement is five to six trained teachers for every 20 
students.  
Sir, India's education system faces a cr itical challenge: Schools lack trained 
teachers to support, especially, dyslexia early - a common learning disability affecting 
reading and writing in 10 to  15 per cent of its 250 million  schoolchildren leading to 
undetected cases and wasted potential. Un treated dyslexia does not reflect low 
intelligence. Many dyslexic individuals excel in creative fields, entrepreneurship and 
innovation, but without early interventio n and guidance, these students face 
frustration, low self-esteem and higher dropout rates. Sir, my request to the 
Government is to please prioritize WHO-aligned teacher training and infrastructure to 
deliver early screening, tailored suppor t which would unlock human potential, 
boosting literacy rates and economic productivity. Thank you, Sir.                                
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Ja ya Amitabh Bachchan : Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Sh ri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),         
Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Dr. V. Sivada san (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu & Kashmir), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Haris Beeran  (Keral a), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shri Pramod Tiwari  (Rajasthan), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri Javed Ali Khan 
(Uttar Pradesh) and Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra).    
Now, Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli.  
Concern over repeated ONGC blowouts and industrial safety failures in                    
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Konaseema District, Andhra Pradesh 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI (Andhra Pradesh) : Sir, ONGC is carrying out 
oil and gas exploration activities in Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Konaseema District of Andhra 
Pradesh. During these operations, a blowou t incident was reported at Irusumanda 
village, one of the ONGC wells, resulting in  an uncontrolled release of gas and oil 
causing concern among nearby residents. ONGC activated its Crisis Management 
Team (CMT) and senior technical experts to  manage and contain the incident.  The 
following similar blowouts or major industri al incidents have occurred previously in 
Konaseema District. One, Pasarlapudi bl owout in 1995: A major ONGC blowout 
where fire raged for 65 days, and widely co nsidered the largest in the history.  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
21

 
 
Second, Devarapalli blowout in 1997: This is another significant ONGC well, where 
blowout occurred in the Kothapeta Mandal and flames climbed up  to 100 meters.  
Third, Tandavapalli blowout in 2005: Simi lar blowout contained within 4 hours. 
Fourth, Nagaram Pipeline Blaze in 2014:  A GAIL gas pipeline explosion in 
Mamidikuduru Mandal killed 23 persons an d injured 16 persons.  Fifth, Uppudi 
blowout in 2020: Blowout near Uppudi village capped after two days.  Other 
blowouts/mud incidents occurred in 1992 including Komarada mud blowout.  
Seventh, Hydrogen Sulfide leak at Kesanapa lli in 2025: A gas leak incident occurred 
affecting workers and a child due to equipment/maintenance issues.  In Konaseema 
and its vicinity, there have been at least 5-7 notable blowouts or major pipeline/gas 
leak incidents over the last 30 years befo re the 2026 event. The people of Konaseema 
are facing many problems due to these blowouts. The nearby land at the gas wells will 
sink and also the sea will go behind.  The GAIL or ONGC or oil companies are not 
providing job opportunities to the local educated youth.  The cooking gas scheme is 
also not being provided to the residents of Konaseema.   I urge the Petroleum Ministry 
that necessary action may be taken for immediate enhanced financial assistance to 
the affected farmers due to Irusumanda incident and also keep in mind that these 
efforts are aimed to control the blowouts, protect residents, and restore normalcy 
while assessing and mitigating impacts on local communities and agriculture.                             
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shri Subhas Ch andra Bose Pilli: Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), and Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy (Andhra Pradesh).                                  
Now, Shri Sujeet Kumar. 
Proposal for introduction of Corporate Research Responsibility (CRR) in  
the Companies Act 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha): Sir, I rise to highlight the need for corporate support 
for research in our country. Section 1 35 of the Companies Act mandates that 
companies that meet certain financial threshold have to spen d on CSR.  Today, 
27,000 companies are contributing over Rs.34,000 crores towards education, 
healthcare, livelihood, skilling, sports and ru ral development. Many hon. Members in 
the House will attest to the impactful work of CSR in their respective States or 
constituencies. The CSR framework has pr oven that when we align corporate 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
success with national priorities through clear legislation, then India benefits 
tremendously. Our hon. Prime Minister has b een inspiring us to work towards and to 
realize our vision of becoming a developed nation by 2047. But for this to happen, 
robust investment in research and innovation is not desirable, it is essential. 
Innovation and research are the foundation of any nation's  progress, particularly, a 
nation like ours which is developing rapidl y.  The Parliament passed the Anusandhan 
National Research Foundation Act in 2023,  for which I compliment the Government, 
and year-after-year, in the Annual Budget , the hon. Finance Minister has been 
earmarking funds for research, which deserves commendation. But, despite all this, 
India today spends only 0.7 per cent of ou r annual GDP on research which is really 
pathetic compared to other countries. Si r, China spends abou t 2.56 per cent, US 
spends 3.5 per cent and Isr ael spends 5.2 per cent of its GDP on research. The 
private sector’s research in western countries, developed countries is over 70 to 80 
per cent of the annual research spent in that nation.                                                             
But, in India, it is less  than half of that. Only 36 per cent of the total R&D 
expenditure in India is from the private s ector.  So, Sir, (a) R&D spend in India is 
low and (b) even on this low R&D spend, th e private sector spend is even lower.  
So, Sir, I propose that the Government introduce Section 135A called Corporate 
Research Responsibility in the Companies Act to replicate our successful CSR model 
and, Sir, the framework can be straightfo rward.  Companies meeting the existing 
CSR threshold, that is net worth over Rs. 500 crore, turnover ov er Rs.1000 crore and 
net profit over Rs.5 crore, would contribu te 1 per cent of their average net profit 
towards designated research activities. सर, जय जवान, जय िकसान, जय िवज्ञान, जय 
अनुसंधान भारत के िवकास का आधुिनक मूल मंतर् है, जो सैिनकȗ, अन्नदाताओं, वैज्ञािनकȗ और 
शोधकतार्ओं के योगदान को सÇमान देता है।  Sir, Lal Bahadur Shastri gave us the slogan  
‘जय िकसान, जय िवज्ञान,’.  Narendra Modi ji, in 2019, added ‘ जय अनुसंधान’ to this 
slogan, Sir.  यह नारा आत्मिनभर्र भारत और 21वीं सदी के ज्ञान आधािरत िवकास को दशार्ता है। 
Sir, Hence, I request the Government to  consider introducing Section 135A in 
Companies Act.           
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar: Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha),      
Shri Debashish Samantaray (Odisha), Shri  Gulam Ali (Nominated), Shri Satnam 
Singh Sandhu (Nominated), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bih ar), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),    
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. Wils on (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
(Nominated), Shri Harsh Vardhan Shring la (Nominated), Shri Madan Rathore 
(Rajasthan), Dr. Kavita Patidar (Mad hya Pradesh), Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
23

 
 
(Assam), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh) and Shrimati Sumitra Balmik 
(Madhya Pradesh).                              
Now, Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha. 
Concern over the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) Guidelines in  
Hilly region 
SHRI DORJEE TSHERING LEPCHA (Sikkim):  Sir, the PMGSY has played vital role in 
expanding all-weather road connectivity across rural Sikkim, improving access to 
healthcare, education, markets and livelihood opportunities.  However, several 
remote villages in the State continue to  remain unconnected due to the rigid 
application of existing criteria, particul arly population norms.  Sikkim's unique 
conditions - its fully mountainous terrain, scattered settlements, prolonged monsoon 
seasons and high susceptibility to landslides -- make connectivit y not only essential 
for development but also crucial for national  security since nearly 90 per cent  of the 
State’s boundary with China, Bhutan and Nepal.  The current population threshold of 
250 persons for PMGSY eligibility excludes sparsely populated, but genuinely isolated 
habitations.  A reduction of threshold to 15 0 persons is requested to ensure equitable 
for all rural communities.  The PMGSY road s have completed seven years, face rapid 
deterioration due to heavy rainfall and n eed timely upgradation, strengthening and 
resurfacing to maintain connectivity.  In regi on with high rainfall, many rural areas, the 
existing PMGSY carpeting norms of a 20 mm thin layer has now shown early 
deterioration.  This thin layer is insuffici ent to intense monsoon conditions, leading to 
rapid wear and reduced lifespan.  Upgrading carpeting to thicker, higher specification 
layer will significantly enhance longer-las ting roads.   Such improvement will 
contribute to long-term sustainability and reliability of roads, reducing maintenance 
needs and improving connectivit y in vulnerable regions.  The fragile Himalayan terrain 
necessities protection measures in all PMGSY works, including retaining and breast 
walls, drainage systems an d robust slope-stabilisation structures capable of 
withstanding high-intensified rainfall.  In view of above, I request the Central 
Government to kindly look into these grievances.  Thank you, Chairman Sir.                                        
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Dorjee Ts hering Lepcha: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. Meenakshi Jain (Nominated),  Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
(Nominated), Shrimati S. Phangnon Kony ak (Nagaland), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai 
Dholakia (Gujarat), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh, (Chhattisgarh), Shri Rwngwra 
Narzary (Assam) and Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan). 
Now, Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan. 
Demand to protect and commemorate the site of derailment of a Military Special Train 
at Panikhaiti (Assam) during the Quit India Movement 
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to speak in my 
own language Assamese.  “The final stage of the freedom struggle was the "Quit 
India" movement in 1942.  After the imprisonment of the leaders from across India, 
the freedom movement immediately turned into a massive mass struggle in which 
almost every Indian participated. This mass struggle demanded that the British 
imperialists leave India and, at the same time, opposed fascism and military 
cooperation in the war during World War II.  Like other parts of India, the protesters in 
Assam set fire to bridges and Government  offices in various places, and stopped 
supplies to the army.  As a result, the in human atrocities committed by the army and 
police against civilians were increasing da y by day.  The leading freedom-fighting 
volunteers of the  
Congress even decided to overturn tr ains carrying soldiers to protest  against 
anti-people atrocities committed by the army against civilians.  To implement this 
decision, the Congress leaders and workers of  Nagaon at the time ultimately decided 
to do so near Guwahati.  And the final choice for this was the place called Nalghuli, 
situated between Panbari and Panikhaiti railway stations on the east side of 
Guwahati. The campaign was led by Mahadananda Devgoswami, the leading leader 
of the freedom fighters' suicide squad, and ten of his fellow fighters.  They were from 
different parts of Nagaon, and Mahadanand a Devgoswami himself was a resident of 
Mayong.   These fighters derailed a special trai n carrying about 700 to 1,000 British-
American soldiers to Dimapur in presen t-day Nagaland between 7 and 8 pm on 
November 24, 1942, and overturned the entire train into a ditch in the Digaru River. All 
soldiers, including the driver, were killed in this incident.   It was a remarkable event in 
the Indian Independence Movement.   
Sir, though this incident happened in Assam, it has not been recorded in any 
history book of India and remains in the dark!  The train's engine is still under the 
                                                           
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Assamese.  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
25

 
 
ground of the railway line of Doh pitni in Nalghuli, as locals claimed.   This rare event 
of freedom struggle is not mentioned in any history book of India, but the novel 
"Mrityunjaya" written by Jnanpith Awar d winner and former President of Assam 
Sahitya Sabha, Dr. Birendra Kumar Bhattacharya, describes this struggle, which took 
place 83 years ago.                                                                  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan:    Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),  
Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Dr. V. Sivada san (Kerela), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Javed Ali Khan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerela), and Dr. John Brittas (Kerela).                                                    
Next, Shriman Harsh Mahajan – hon. Memb er not present.  Next,        
Shriman Rajeev Shukla.  
Need for regulation of social media to prevent spread of rumors and ensure 
accountability 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा (छǄीसगढ़): माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे अपनी बात रखने का मौका 
िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।  यह अच्छा है िक इलेक्टर्ॉिनकी और सूचना ĢौǏोिग की  मंतर्ी, 
अिÌवनी वैÍणव जी यहां बैठे हȅ।  मȅ आज इस सदन मȂ एक ऐसे मुǈे की ओर आपका ध्यान िदलवाना 
चाहता हूँ, जो न िसफर्  समाज की बातचीत को Ģभािवत कर रहा है, बिÊक हमारे लोकतांितर्क 
ढाँचे, हमारे युवाओं के मा निसक ÎवाÎथ्य और सावर्जिनक िवÌवास की नींव को भी िहला रहा है। 
बात सोशल मीिडया की है और उससे भी ज्यादा, सोशल मीिडया की जवाबदेही की है। आज 
िÎथित यह है िक कोई भी कुछ भी िलख देता है, िकसी पर भी आरोप लगा देता है, िकसी की भी 
ĢितÍठा को एक ही पोÎट मȂ तार-तार कर देता है।  माननीय सभ
ापित महोदय, एक बार कोई चीज़ 
वायरल हो गई, तो उस असत्य को वापस लेना लगभग असंभव हो जाता है। इसकी न Ãलेटफ़ॉ मर् 
िज़Çमेदारी लेते हȅ, न िलखने वाला सामने आता है और उसके  बीच मȂ िपसता है एक आम 
नागिरक, उसकी इज्ज़त, उसका किरयर, उसका मानिसक संतुलन।  
सभापित जी, हाल ही मȂ गािजयाबाद मȂ तीन नाबािलग बिच्चयȗ की कोिरयन गेÇस देखते 
हुए आत्महत्या की ददर्नाक घटना ने पूरे देश को झकझोर िदया। इस मामले मȂ यह सामने आया 
िक सोशल म
ीिडया और ऑनलाइन कन्टȂट से जुड़ी  
अफवाहȂ, अितरंिजत नैरेिटव और िडिजटल दबाव ने उनकी मानिसक िÎ थित पर गहरा Ģभाव 
डाला। सवाल यह नहीं है िक दोष िकसका था, बिÊक सवाल यह है िक जब एक नाबािलग 
लगातार िडिजटल ĥम, अवाÎतिवक अपेक्षाओं और ऑनलाइन दबाव के बीच टूट रहा होता है, 
तब उसे बचाने की िज़Çमेदारी िकसकी है? क्या उस Ãलेटफ़ॉमर् की नहीं, जो ऐसे कन्टȂट को बढ़ाव ा 
देता है? सोिचए, यह कैसी िवडÇबना है िक हम एक ऐसे युग मȂ रह रहे हȅ जहाँ हिथयारȗ पर तो 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
कानून है, जहर पर कानून है, सड़क पर गाड़ी चलाने पर कानून है, लेिकन सोशल मीिडया पर 
असत्य फैलाने की कोई ठोस जवाबदेही तय ही नहीं की गई है। कंपिनयȗ के एÊगोिरदम यह तय 
करते हȅ िक हमȂ क्या देखना है, लेिकन यह बताने की िज़Çमेदारी उनसे कोई नहीं मांगता है िक 
िकस आधार पर िकसी असत्य को लाखȗ लोगȗ तक पहुँचाया गया। यह कौन सी ËयवÎथा है, जहाँ 
Ģभाव है, पहुँच है, लेिकन जवाबदेही नहीं है? आज यह सदन इस ĢÌन पर िवचार करे िक क्या 
सोशल मीिडया पर आचरण के ÎपÍट िनयम होने चािहए या नहीं? क्या यह Î
वीकायर् है िक करोड़ȗ 
भारतीयȗ तक पहुंचने वाले Ãलेटफॉमर् community guidelines के नाम पर सब कुछ अपने िहसाब 
से चलाएँ और देश की संसद तमाशा देखती रहे? क्या यह उिचत है िक िकसी Ëयिƪ की छिव नÍट 
हो जाए, िकसी मिहला को लगातार ऑनलाइन उत्
पीड़न सहना पड़े, िकसी िकशोर की मानिसक 
सेहत िबगाड़ी जाए और िफर भी कोई िजÇमेदार न हो?  
महोदय, मंतर्ी जी यहां बैठे भी हुए हȅ।  मȅ िवनĦ आगर् ह करता हूँ िक सरकार इस िवषय पर 
ÎपÍट नीित लेकर आए, ऐसी नीित, िजसमȂ अिभËयिƪ की Îवतंतर्ता भी सुरिक्षत रहे और गलत 
सूचना फैलाने वालȗ की जवाबदेही भी तय हो।  ऐसी नीित िज समȂ कंपिनयȗ की पारदिर्शता, कन्टȂट 
मॉडरेशन की समीक्षा, grievance redressal की मजबूती और भारतीय उपयोगकतार्ओं की 
िडिजटल सुरक्षा इत्यािद पर ठोस कदम उठाए जाएँ।                                            
सभापित जी, सोशल मीिडया केवल मनोरंजन का मंच नहीं है, बिÊक यह जनमत िनमार्ण 
का सबसे Ģभा
वशाली माध्यम बन चुका है। इसिलए इस पर जवाबदेही िसफर्  तकनीकी मुǈा नहीं, 
बिÊक लोकतांितर्क आवÌयकता है।    
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Rajeev Shuk la: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),      
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Shri Nira njan Bishi (Odisha),  Shri Sanjay Yadav 
(Bihar),  Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (M aharashtra),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),  
Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Shrimati Ja ya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh),    
Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan),  Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan),  Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Dr. Radha Moha n Das Agrawal (Uttar Pradesh),      
Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu & Kashmir), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan),   Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala),       
Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh),  Shri  Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra) and   
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh (Bihar).        
Now, Shrimati Sudha Murty. 
Demand to integrate Foot Reflexology Studies under the AYUSH Framework 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY (Nominated) :  Sir, I thank you for giving me an 
opportunity to talk on foot reflexology.  Foot  is one of the parts of the body which we 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
27

 
 
always neglect, but, it really gives a lot of  benefits, which we do not even consider.  
For example, by finding out the sensitive points, stimulation points in the feet, you can 
reduce the pain, you can relax and stress also  can be reduced.  This practice is very 
common in South-East Asia, starting from  Thailand, Indonesia, Laos, Vietnam and 
many more countries. It is similar to our massage therapy.  The Indian traditional 
massage is so well known an d many people come from abroad to take Indian 
massages. People do come to South East Asia for this treatment.  It is non-invasive, 
pain reducing and very useful for old-age people.  
Sir, the Government of India, particularly, the Ayush Depart ment is well known 
for adapting herbal, natural, time-tested and traditional treatments. Foot reflexology 
is also one of the traditional treatments, which is practised in the South East Asia. So, 
I would like to request that the Government of India,  Ministry of Ayush, should 
consider this point and train our people wi th all the details abou t the safety and the 
knowledge, everything, and introduce this concept of foot reflexology in our Ayush 
hospitals.  Sir, people with diabetes become extremely sensitive.  Nowadays, 
because it is one of the major problems in India, every hospital should have a 
separate section for foot treatment, foot  reflexology, massaging  and understanding 
how you can reduce non-invasive treatment  and pain.  We can also have other 
treatments along with foot problems in diabetic cases because it affects other parts of 
the body also. So, people will come to know about early diabetic intervention, you 
can also find out what the causes are and,  accordingly, you can take the treatment. 
So, I consider that this is one of the negl ected parts; so, we should introduce this 
new concept of treating our feet and giving  proper treatment. Thank you very much, 
Sir, for giving me time.  Dhanayavad, Jai Hind. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sudha Murty :  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),  Shri Sanjay  Yadav (Bihar),  Shrimati Maya Naroliya 
(Madhya Pradesh), D. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),  Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),         
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala),  Shri A.A. Rahi m (Kerala),  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
(Nominated),  Shri Sujeet Ku mar (Odisha) and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu ).                       
(Ends) 
Now, Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni. 
  
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Demand for introduction of a premium train service between Pune and Delhi 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलकणीर् (महाराÍटर्): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मेरा आज का शून्य काल का 
िवषय पुणे और िदÊली के बीच Ģीिमयम टर्ेन सेवा Ģारंभ करने के बारे मȂ है।   महोदय, पुणे एक 
अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् शहर है। मȅ उससे जुड़ी टर्ेन की समÎया की ओर आपका ध्यान आकिर्षत करना 
चाहती हूँ। पुणे एक िवǏा नगरी है। वह केवल महाराÍटर् के िलए ही नहीं, बिÊक पूरे देश के िलए 
एक िशक्ष
ा की नगरी है। उसे 'ऑक्सफो ड र् ऑफ द ईÎट' कहा जाता है। पुणे एक आईटी हब है। पुणे 
एक औǏोिगक और Îटाटर्अप िसटी है। पुणे मȂ बहुत ही ĢितिÍठत िशक्षण संÎथाएं हȅ, अनुसंधान 
कȂदर् हȅ, बहुत सारी आईटी कंपनीज़ हȅ, ऑटोमोबाइल और िड फȂस  के उǏोग हȅ। पुणे अब िडफȂस  
कॉिरडोर भी बनने जा रहा है। इससे जुड़े बहुत सारे उǏोग पुणे मȂ हȅ। इसकी वजह से पुणे मȂ बहुत 
सारे छातर्, ĢोफेशनÊस, उǏमी, कारोबारी और सर कारी अिधकारी कायर्रत हȅ और हजारȗ-हजार 
लोग पुणे से िदÊली आते-जाते रहते हȅ। महोदय, इसके  बावजूद देश की राजधानी िदÊली से पुणे 
जैसी महत्वपूणर् िसटी के बीच आज तक कोई भी सीधी, तेज और Ģीिम यम Ǜेणी की रेल सेवा 
उपलÅध नहीं है। यह अत्यंत दुभार्ग्यपूणर् है। महोदय, वतर्मान मȂ पुणे और िदÊली के बीच चलने 
वाली जो टर्ेन है, वह 20 से 30 घंटे लेती है। Additionally, बहुत ही अिनिÌचतता है, भीड़ है, बहुत 
ही सीिमत सुिवधाएं हȅ और Ģीिमयम िवकÊपȗ का अभाव याितर्
यȗ के िलए बड़ी परेशानी का िनमार्ण 
कर रहा है।   माननीय महोदय, आज पूरे देश मȂ बहुत सारे शहरȗ को राजधानी  एक्सĢेस, वंदे 
भारत और तेजस जैसी सुिवधाओं से जोड़ा जा रह
ा है।  राजधानी एक्सĢेस जैसी टर्ेनȂ और Îलीपर 
टर्ेनȂ राजधानी को बड़े शहरȗ से जोड़ रही है।   महोदय, मȅ आगर्ह करती हूँ िक पुणे और भारत की 
राजधानी िदÊली के बीच राज धानी  एक्सĢेस शुरू की जाए, नहीं तो वंदे भारत Îलीपर टर्ेन शुरू 
की जाए, तेजस एक्सĢेस जैसी टर्ेन भी शुरू की जा सकती है।  सरकार से मेरी यह request है, 
यह अनुरोध है िक पुणे जैसी महत्वपूणर् िसटी को इससे वंिचत नहीं रखा जाए, धन्यव ाद।                                       
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Medha Vish ram Kulkarni: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), and Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala).                                                                
Next, Shri Harsh Mahajan. 
Need for all-weather connectivity to Pangi Valley through the Chamba-Killar- 
Leh corridor 
SHRI HARSH MAHAJAN (Himachal Pradesh) :  Hon. Chairman, Sir, I would like to 
draw the attention of this House to the Pa ngi Valley region in Chamba district of 
Himachal Pradesh, and the need to de velop Chamba-Killar-Leh route as both a 
lifeline for the tribal citizens of this region  as well as a critical defence route for the 
nation.  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
29

 
 
Sir, Pangi Valley is a tribal-dominated area in the aspirational district of 
Chamba. It is home to more than 25,000 tribal citizens who remain cut-off from the 
rest of the country for nearly eight months every year. Due to poor and seasonal road 
connectivity, access to healthcare, ed ucation and essential services becomes 
severely restricted. Moreover, this region is  one of the most beautiful regions in the 
country and when connected will unlock a huge opportunity for tourism in the region 
and enhancing the social and economic potential of this region. The development of 
Chamba-Killar road into an all-weather ro ad, along with the proposed Chaini Pass 
Tunnel of about 8.5 kilometres, will end this isolation. Sir, this corridor also carries 
exceptional strategic importance. At present, NH-154A connects Pathankot to 
Chamba, and a seasonal road exists up to Killar. А missing link of about 52 kilometres 
towards Leh needs to be developed. Once completed, this route will become the 
shortest approach to Leh, reducing th e Pathankot-Leh distance from about 800 
kilometres to nearly 450 kilometres, and Pathankot-Kargil from 1,000 kilometres to 
around 550 kilometres. This corridor originates from Pathankot Cantonment, a major 
defence base, and passes through strategica lly-sensitive terrain close to both the 
LAC and the LOC. It will provide a vital al ternative to Manali-Leh axis, reduce single-
route dependency, and strengthen defence logistics, emergency mobilisation, and 
medical evacuation. Sir, this project perf ectly aligns tribal welfare, regional 
development, and national security. 
Sir, I urge the Government to kindly  declare Chamba-Killar-Leh corridor as a 
strategic defence route and entrust it s development to the Border Roads 
Organisation, so that our border-prepare dness and our most-remote citizens are 
strengthened together. Thank you, Sir.                                          
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Harsh Mahajan:  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),          
Dr. John  Brittas (Kerala) and Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala).                                                                    
Now, Dr. Bhim Singh. 
Need to review ethanol supply cuts by Oil Marketing Companies in Bihar to ensure 
contract continuity and policy stability 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार): सभापित महोदय, मȅ िबहार मȂ Îथािपत एथनॉल उत्पादन इकाइयȗ से जुड़े 
एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय की ओर सरकार का ध्यान आकृÍट करना चाहता हूं। महोदय, माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ देश मȂ एथनॉल  िमǛण कायर्कर्म के माध्यम से ऊजार् सुरक्षा, 
पयार्वरण संरक्षण और िकसानȗ की आय बढ़ाने की िदशा मȂ ऐितहािसक Ģगित की गई है।  यह 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
कायर्कर्म 'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' और ' हिरत अथर्ËयवÎथा' का मजबूत आधार बना है। इसी 
सकारात्मक पृÍठभूिम मȂ यह िवषय िंचता का कारण है िक तेल िवपणन कंपिनयȗ ǎारा िबहार राज्य 
की एथनॉल उत्पादन इकाइयȗ से supply orders 50 Ģितशत कम कर िदए गए हȅ।  इसके  कारण 
राज्य के एथनॉल Ãलांटȗ को उत्पादन आधा करना पड़ा है, िजसके  कारण इन Ãलांट्स को 
संचािलत करना अलाभकर हो गया है और ये बंदी के कगार पर पहुंच चुके हȅ।  इनके  संचालकȗ 
ǎारा किर्मयȗ की छंटनी की जा रही है, िजससे बेरोजगारी बढ़ सकती है।  िबहार मȂ मक्का 
आधािरत एथेनॉल उत्पादन की अपार संभावनाएं हȅ और यह िकसानȗ को सुिनिÌचत बाजार 
उपलÅध कराने का ...(Ëयवधान)...                              
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), associated himself with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Bhim Singh.  
Now Question Hour.  Q.No.76
 
12.00 Noon 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
Non-stoppage of trains at Tirur Railway Station 
*76. SHRI HARIS BEERAN: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a)    whether Government has taken notice of unfortunate situation of the neglect 
towards Tirur Railway station where a district centre of Malappuram does 
not have a single stoppage for 30 trai ns that are passing through the Tirur 
Railway Station; 
(b)     if so, the details thereof, and the reasons for non-stoppage of these trains; 
(c)   whether Government is aware of the fact that premium trains like Vande 
Bharat and Rajadhani Express have a stoppage in all other district 
headquarters except Malappuram District; and 
(d)     if so, the details thereof, and the reasons therefor? 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS  (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) :  (a) to (d) A 
Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
31

 
 
Statement 
(a) to (d) Tirur is presently being se rved by following 90 train services 
including 20631/20632 Mangal uru Central-Thiruvananthapuram Central Vande Bharat 
Express, inter alia  providing connectivity to cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Chennai, etc.  
S.N. Train No. and Name 
1 10215 Madgaon–Ernakulam Express 
2 10216 Ernakulam–Madgaon Express 
3 11097 Pune–Ernakulam Poorna Express 
4 11098 Ernakulam–Pune  Poorna Express 
5 12075 Kozhikode– Thiruvananthapuram Central Jan Shatabdi Express 
6 12076 Thiruvananthapuram Central– Kozhikode Jan Shatabdi Express 
7 12081 Kannur– Thiruvananthapuram Central Jan Shatabdi Express 
8 12082 Thiruvananthapuram Centra l–Kannur Jan Shatabdi Express 
9 12201 Lokmanya Tilak (T)– Thiruvananthapuram North Garib Rath Express 
10 12202 Thiruvananthapuram North–Lokm anya Tilak (T) Garib Rath Express 
11 12217 Thiruvananthapuram North - Chandigarh Express 
12 12218 Chandigarh - Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
13 12601 MGR Chennai Central–MangaluruCentral   Express 
14 12602 Mangaluru Central–MG R Chennai Central Express 
15 12617 Ernakulam–Ha zrat Nizamuddin Express 
16 12618 Hazrat Nizamuddin–Ernakulam Express 
17 12685 MGR Chennai Central –Mangaluru Central Express 
18 12686 Mangaluru Central–MG R Chennai Central Express 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
19 12789 Kacheguda–Mangaluru Central Express 
20 12790 Mangaluru Central–Kacheguda Express 
21 12977 Ernakulam Junction - Ajmer Express 
22 12978 Ajmer - Ernakulam Junction Express 
23 16159 Chennai Egmore–Mangaluru Central Express 
24 16160 Mangaluru Centra l–Chennai Egmore Express 
25 16305 Ernakulam–Kannur Express 
26 16306 Kannur–Ernakulam Express 
27 16307 Alappuzha–Kannur Express 
28 16308 Kannur– Alappuzha Express 
29 16311 Shri Ganganagar– Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
30 16312 Thiruvananthapuram North–Shri Ganganagar Express 
31 16323 Coimbatore–Mang aluru Central Express 
32 16324 Mangaluru Cent ral–Coimbatore Express 
33 16329 Nagercoil–Mangalur u Amrit Bharat Express 
34 16330 Mangaluru–Nagerco il Amrit Bharat Express 
35 16333 Veraval– Thiruvananthapuram Central Express 
36 16334 Thiruvananthapuram Central– Veraval Express 
37 16335 Gandhidham–Nagercoil Express 
38 16336 Nagercoil–Gandhidham Express 
39 16337 Okha–Ernakulam Express 
40 16338 Ernakulam–Okha Express 
41 16345 Lokmanya Tilak (T)– Thiruvananthapuram Central Netravati Express 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
33

 
 
42 16346 Thiruvananthapuram Central– Lokmanya Tilak (T) Netravati Express 
43 16347 Thiruvananthapuram Ce ntral–Mangaluru Central Express 
44 16348 Mangaluru Central– Thiruvananthapuram Central Express 
45 16355 Thiruvananthapuram North–MangaluruAntyodaya Express 
46 16356 Mangaluru– Thiruvananthapuram North Antyodaya Express 
47 16527 Yesvantpur–Kannur Express 
48 16528 Kannur– Yesvantpur Express 
49 16565 Yesvantpur–Mangaluru Central Express 
50 16566 Mangaluru Central– Yesvantpur Express 
51 16603 Mangaluru Central– Thiruvananthapuram Central Maveli Express 
52 16604 Thiruvananthapuram Centra l–Mangaluru Central Maveli Express 
53 16605 Mangaluru Central– Thiruvananthapuram Central Ernad Express 
54 16606 Thiruvananthapuram Centra l–Mangaluru Centra l Ernad Express 
55 16607 Kannur–Coimbatore Express 
56 16608 Coimbatore–Kannur Express 
57 16609 Thrissur–Kannur Express 
58 16629 Thiruvananthapuram Central –Mangaluru Central Malabar Express 
59 16630 Mangaluru Central– Thiruvananthapuram Central Malabar Express 
60 16649 Mangaluru Central–Ka nniyakumari Parasuram Express 
61 16650 Kanniyakumari–Mangalur u Central Parasuram Express 
62 16855 Puducherry–Mang aluru Central Express 
63 16856 Mangaluru Central–Puducherry Express 
64 16857 Puducherry–Mang aluru Central Express 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
65 16858 Mangaluru Central–Puducherry Express 
66 19259 Thiruvananthapuram North–Bhavnagar (T) Express 
67 19260 Bhavnagar (T)– Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
68 19577 Tirunelveli - Jamnagar  Express 
69 19578 Jamnagar– Tirunelveli Express 
70 20631 Mangaluru Central– Thiruvananthapuram Central Vande Bharat 
71 20632 Thiruvananthapuram Centra l–Mangaluru Central Vande Bharat 
72 20909 Thiruvananthapuram North–Porbandar Express 
73 20910 Porbandar– Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
74 22113 Lokmanya Tilak (T)– Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
75 22114 Thiruvananthapuram No rth–Lokmanya Tilak (T) Express 
76 22149 Ernakulam–Pune Express 
77 22150 Pune–Ernakulam Express 
78 22475 Hisar–Coimbatore   Express 
79 22476 Coimbatore-Hisar Express 
80 22609 Mangaluru Centra l–Coimbatore Express 
81 22610 Coimbatore–Mang aluru Central Express 
82 22637 MGR Chennai Central –Mangaluru Central Express 
83 22638 Mangaluru Central–MG R Chennai Central Express 
84 22851 Santragachi–Mangal uru Central Vivek Express 
85 22852 Mangaluru Central– Santragachi Vivek Express 
86 56600 Kannur–Sho ranur Passenger 
87 56601 Kozhikode–Shoranur Passenger 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
35

 
 
88 56602 Shoranur–Koz hikode Passenger 
89 66323 Kannur–Shoranur MEMU 
90 66324 Shoranur–Kannur MEMU 
 
To facilitate the passengers of Ti rur, stoppage of 22475/22476 Hisar-
Coimbatore Express has been provided at Tirurw.e.f 28.01.2026. Further, 
16329/16330 Nagercoil-Mangaluru Junction Amrit Bharat Express (with scheduled 
stoppage at Tirur), has also been introduced w.e.f 27.01.2026.   
Besides, provision of stoppages of train services depends on the traffic 
justification, operational feasibility including availability of extra time on the section 
availability of matching infrastructure such as Platform length etc. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  First supplementary, Shri Haris Beeran. 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, through yo u, I wish to ask the hon. 
Minister whether the Central Government ha s any proposal for a high-speed railway 
line project like the Regional Rapid Transit System, RRTS, in Kerala.  In connection 
with the same, has Metro Man, Shri E. Sreedharan, submitted any project proposal? 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW :  M r. Chairman, Sir, for Kerala, I would like to put on 
record that a large number of projects have  been taken up for increasing the capacity 
of Railways in Kerala. As we are all aware, in this Budget, there has been a record 
allocation for the State of Kerala for development of Railways. The allocation is         
Rs. 3,795 crore, which is ten times the allocation which used to be during the 
Congress time.  The kind of projects which we have taken up would totally change the 
capacity of Railways as they are there in Kerala now. Going from the North to the 
South, from Mangalore to Shoranur, for the third and fourth line project, DPR is 
already in progress, LiDAR survey has been completed and alignment is under 
finalization. For the Shoranur to Coimbato re and Shoranur to Ernakulam lines, field 
survey has been completed and LiDAR surve y and DPR work is getting finalized. 
Then, for the Ernakulam to Kayankulam third line via Kottayam, traffic survey has 
been completed and field survey is now ge tting completed. For the Kayankulam to 
Thiruvananthapuram third line, again, the LiDAR survey has been completed and 
alignment is under finalization.  For the Th iruvananthapuram to Nagercoil line, survey 
is under progress.  For the Thuravoor to Ambalapuzha line, survey has been 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
completed and DPR has been prepared.  So, overall, the way projects are being 
taken up, the capacity of Kerala railway lines will be practically doubled, actually more 
than doubled.  That will br ing a huge change in the way people commute. As for the 
earlier Silver Line, project wh ich was proposed by the St ate Government, it had huge 
environmental impacts. I think that project wa s not even feasible, but still, if the State 
Government wants that high-speed railway  line, we can reconsider that. It all 
depends upon the State Government. …( Interruptions)…  Hon. Chairman, Sir, I would 
also like to request, through the hon. Chair and hon. MPs, that the State Government 
should support the Central Government in  getting the railway projects expedited. 
Land acquisition is such a serious problem an d the support has been so less that just 
about 14 per cent of the land has been acquired. How will we develop these projects? 
How will we develop the railway lines if the State does not support? So, that kind of 
support is needed, hon. Chairman, Sir.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What he says is correct.  Don’t put the blame on the Government.  
You may also help him get things done.  Second supplementary, Shri Haris Beeran. 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN:  Sir, my specific question was about Tirur Railway Station. The 
Tirur Railway Station is one of the oldest ra ilway stations, which served as the district 
headquarters of Malappuram district.  It is commercially a very viable railway station. 
This railway station has also been included in the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme. Now, 
the problem is that 30 trains pass this ra ilway station without a stoppage. I would like 
to ask the hon. Minister whether there is any proposal to have a stoppage there for 
trains like Rajdhani, it having served as th e district headquarters. In his reply, the 
Minister has stated that the platform length is an impediment. Now, work is being 
done there under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme . I would like to know from the 
hon. Minister whether expanding the stat ion and increasing its length is being 
considered under the Amrit Bharat scheme. 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW: Hon. Member has probably not read the answer. I would 
just like to remind him very politely and hum bly that there are 90 train services which 
stop at Tirur. So, the hon. Member should  say that, yes, there are 90 trains which 
stop and he wants more; that is the point. So, he cannot say that no train stops at 
Tirur. And, yes, of course, I have given a complete list of all the trains which actually 
stop at Tirur.  If there is any other request, hon. Member can always meet me. We are 
very open-minded. Our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, always tells us, first 
focus on people's problems and solve them with an open mind.  That is the approach 
that all of us take. All of us try to be open-minded and try to solve problems. 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
37

 
 
Regarding the Tirur Railway Station, yes, increasing the platform width, making the 
platforms of standard high-level height, ma king sure that the platform covers are 
proper, making sure that a extended FOB is  there, so that people get enough space 
to cross from one platform to another and then making sure that both sides of the 
station are covered, are all parts of the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme. I am very happy 
to share with you that by now we have completed about 170 stations out of 1,300 
stations that we have taken up and the progress is very fast. I also want to share with 
you, hon. Chairman, Sir, and through you, with the hon. Members, that in the other 
countries, mostly, when the station is redeve loped, they stop all traffic. We, in our 
country, cannot stop the traffic because peop le are so dependent on railways.  So, 
we are doing the work while the trains are being operated. That is why everything has 
to be done with a lot of care and a lot of focus on safety. So, I will request hon. 
Members also to please support and co-opera te in that journey.  It is a major 
transformation of railways which is  happening under hon. Prime Minister,                
Shri Narendra Modi's vision and his leadership. So, all of us must try to support it.  
And, please bring the right facts that, yes, 90 trains are stopping. If there are more, 
we can always sit together and solve. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary; Shri Gulam Ali. 
Ǜी गुलाम अली: चेयरमैन साहब, आपने मुझे सÃलीमȂटर्ी उठाने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए 
आपका शुिकर्या।  सर, हम जÇमू-कÌमीर से आते हȅ। कÌमीर के लोगȗ ने ख्व ाब देखा था िक कभी 
हम भी टर्ेन पर सवारी करȂगे।  मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी को और रेलवे िमिनÎटर को जÇमू-कÌमीर 
की खासकर, कÌमीर की अवाम की तरफ से इस बात के िलए मुबारकबाद देता हूँ िक जो एिरया 
छः महीने तक कट ऑफ रहता था, वहाँ आपने बफर्  के बीच मȂ से रेलवे ला
ईन िनकालने का काम 
िकया है।  सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से  बताना चाहूँगा िक पूरी दुिनया ने िवजुअÊ स  देखे हȅ िक कÌमीर 
के लोग िकतने खुश हȅ।  सर, इसी के साथ, मȅने िमिनÎटर साहब से एक क्वेÌचन यह िकया था िक 
राजौरी-पुंछ, जो िक बॉडर्र बेÊट है, क्या उसके  िलए भी कभी आप टर्ेन लाइन िबछाएँगे, तािक 
हमारी िसक्योिरटी फोसȃज़ को उन ए
िरयाज़ मȂ जाने मȂ आसानी हो, जो बफर्बारी के दौरान कट 
ऑफ रहते हȅ।  अभी मȅ भी वहाँ गया था।  इन्हȗने एक-दो िदन पहले ही इसके  िलए अनाउंस िकया 
है।  हम इसके  िलए भी राजौरी-पुंछ की अवाम की तरफ से इनको बहुत शुिकर्या करते हȅ। सर, मेरा 
क्वेÌचन यह है िक कÌमीर, जो िक दुिनया की एक खूबसूरत जगह है और जÇमू, िजसको "िसटी 
ऑफ टेÇपÊस" कहा जाता है,  वहाँ कभी मेटर्ो बनाने का आपका कोई Ģो गर्ाम है या ऐसा कोई 
Ģोजेक्ट है?  वैसे, मȅने िपछली बार क्वेÌचन भी िकया था।   िमिनÎटर साहब से गुजािरश है िक वे 
इस बारे मȂ बताएँ।  थȅक यू। 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
†ﺟﻧﺎﺏ ﻏﻼﻡ ﻋﻠﯽ:  ﭼﻳﺋﺭﻣﻳﻥ ﺻﺎﺣﺏ، ﺁﭘﻧﮯ ﻣﺟﻬﮯ ﺳﭘﻠﻳﻣﻳﻧﭨﺭی ﺍﭨﻬﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻭﻗﻊ ﺩﻳﺎ، ﺍﺳﮑﮯ ﻟﻳﮯ ﺁپ ﮐﺎ ﺷﮑﺭﻳہ۔ 
  ﺳﺭ، ﮨﻡ ﺟﻣﻭں ﻭ ﮐﺷﻣﻳﺭ ﺳﮯ ﺁﺗﮯ ﮨﻳں۔ ﮐﺷﻣﻳﺭ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻭﮔﻭں ﻧﮯ ﺧﻭﺍﺏ ﺩﻳﮑﻬﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ ﮐہ ﮐﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﻡ ﺑﻬﯽ ﭨﺭﻳﻥ ﭘﺭ 
ﺳﻭﺍﺭی ﮐﺭﻳﻧﮕﮯ۔ ﻣﻳں ﭘﺭﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﻣﻧﺗﺭی، ﻣﻭﺩی ﺟﯽ ﮐﻭ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺭﻳﻠﻭے ﻣﻧﺳﭨﺭ ﮐﻭ ﺟﻣﻭں ﮐﺷﻣﻳﺭ ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎﺹ ﮐﺭ، ﮐﺷﻣﻳﺭ ﮐﯽ 
ﻋﻭﺍﻡ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺭﻑ ﺳﮯ ﺍﺱ ﺎﺕ
ﺑ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻳﮯ ﻣﺑﺎﺭﮐﺑﺎﺩ ﺩﻳﺗﺎ ﮨﻭں، ﮐہ ﺟﻭ ﺍﻳﺭﻳﺎ ﭼﻬ ﻣﮩﻳﻧﮯ ﺗﮏ ﮐٹ ﺍٓﻑ ﺭﮨﺗﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ، ﻭﮨﺎں ﺁﭘﻧﮯ 
ﺑﺭﻑ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻳﭻ ﻣﻳں ﺳﮯ ﺭﻳﻠﻭے ﻻﺋﻳﻥ ﻧﮑﺎﻟﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﺎﻡ ﮐﻳﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺭ، ﻣﻳں ﺁﭘﮑﮯ ﻣﺎﺩﻫﻳﻡ ﺳﮯ ﺑﺗﺎﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻭﻧﮕﺎ ﮐہ ﭘﻭﺭی ﺩﻧﻳﺎ  
ﻧﮯ ﻭﻳﺯﺅﻟﺯ ﺩﻳﮑﻬﮯ ﮨﻳں ﮐہ ﮐﺷﻣﻳﺭ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻭگ ﮐﺗﻧﮯ ﺧﻭﺵ ﮨﻳں۔ 
  ﺳﺭ، ﺍﺳﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ، ﻣﻳں ﻧﮯ ﻣﻧﺳﭨﺭ ﺻﺎﺣﺏ ﺳﮯ ﺍﻳﮏ ﮐﻭﻳﺷﭼﻥ ﻳہ ﮐﻳﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ ﮐہ ﺭﺍﺟﻭﺭی ﭘﻭﻧﭼﻬ، ﺟﻭ ﮐہ ﺑﺎﺭڈﺭ 
ﺑﻳﻠٹ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﻳﺎ ﺍﺳﮑﮯ ﻟﻳﮯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮐﺑﻬﯽ ﺁپ ﭨﺭﻳﻥ ﻻﺋﻥ ﺑﭼﻬﺎﺋﻳﻧﮕﮯ، ﺗﺎﮐہ ﮨﻣﺎﺭی ﺳﻳﮑﻭﺭﭨﯽ ﻓﻭﺭﺳﻳﺯ ﮐﻭ ﺍﻥ ﺍﻳﺭﻳﺎﺯ ﻣﻳں ﺟﺎﻧﮯ  
ﻣﻳں ﺁﺳﺎﻧﯽ ﮨﻭ، ﺟﻭ ﺑﺭﻓﺑﺎﺭی ﮐﮯ ﺩﻭﺭﺍﻥ ﮐٹ ﺍٓﻑ ﺭﮨﺗﮯ ﮨﻳں۔ ﺍﺑﻬﯽ ﻣﻳں ﺑﻬﯽ ﻭﮨﺎں ﮔﻳﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ۔ ﺍﻧﮩﻭں ﻧﮯ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺩﻭ ﺩﻥ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﮨﯽ 
ﺍﺳﮑﮯ ﻟﻳﮯ ﺍﻧﺎﺅﻧﺱ ﮐﻳﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﮨﻡ ﺍﺳﮑﮯ ﻟﻳﮯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺭﺍﺟﻭﺭی ﭘﻭﻧﭼﻬ ﮐﯽ ﻋﻭﺍﻡ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺭﻑ ﺳﮯ ﺍﻧﮑﻭ ﺑﮩﺕ ﺷﮑﺭﻳہ ﮐﺭﺗﮯ ﮨﻳں۔ 
  ﺳﺭ، ﻣﻳﺭﺍ ﮐﻭﻳﺷﭼﻥ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﮐﺷﻣﻳﺭ، ﺟﻭ ﮐہ ﺩﻧﻳﺎ ﮐﯽ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺧﻭﺑﺻﻭﺭﺕ ﺟﮕہ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺟﻣﻭں، ﺟﺱ ﮐﻭ" ﺳﭨﯽ  
ﺍٓﻑ ﭨﻳﻣﭘﻠﺱ" ﮐﮩﺎ ﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﻭﮨﺎں ﮐﺑﻬﯽ ﻣﻳﭨﺭﻭ ﺑﻧﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﺁپ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻭﺋﯽ ﭘﺭﻭﮔﺭﺍﻡ ﮨﮯ ﻳﺎ ﺍﻳﺳﺎ ﮐﻭﺋﯽ ﭘﺭﻭﺟﻳﮑٹ ﮨﮯ؟ ﻭﻳﺳﮯ، 
ﻣﻳں ﻧﮯ ﭘﭼﻬﻠﯽ ﺑﺎﺭ ﮐﻭﻳﺷﭼﻥ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮐﻳﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ۔ ﻣﻧﺳﭨﺭ ﺻﺎﺣﺏ ﺳﮯ ﮔﺯﺍﺭﺵ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻭﻩ ﺍﺱ ﺑﺎﺭے ﻣﻳں ﺑﺗﺎﺋﻳں۔ ﺗﻬﻳﻧﮏ ﻳﻭ۔ 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: मान
नीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सांसद जी ने मेटर्ो से संबंिधत ĢÌन पूछा 
है।  मेटर्ो का काम मेरे विरÍठ साथी, Ǜी मनोहर लाल खƺर जी देखते हȅ।  मȅ इनका ĢÌन उन तक 
जरूर पहुँचाऊँगा। मȅ साथ ही साथ माननीय सांसद जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगा िक आपने मेरे 
साथ एक बहुत बड़ा मुǈा उठाया था िक जो Ǜीनगर से बारामूला वाली लाइन है, उस लाइन से 
कनेक्ट होते हुए तीन Ģोजेक्ट्स का पहले ĢÎताव आया था और उन Ģोजेक्ट्स पर सवȃ चालू हुआ 
था।  जो पहलगाम के िलए और दो Ģोजेक्ट्स थे।  उसमȂ जो ap
ple के orchards पर जो इÇपैक्ट 
पड़ रहा था और जो apple के fa rmers हȅ, सबकी इच्छा थी िक रेलवे मेन लाइन को ही बनाए रखȂ 
और इसके  spurs न बनाएं।  मȅ गुलाम अली जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगा िक आप जो िवषय मेरे 
पास लेकर आए थे, उसके  बाद िकसानȗ की बात सुनी गई, सबकी िरĢेज़Ȃटेशन्स ली गईं और 
सबकी बात सुनने के बाद यह तय िकया गया िक बारामूला से Ǜीनगर की लाइन को और 
strengthen करȂगे और जो दो-तीन spurs बनाने थे, जो वहां से पहलगा
म के िलए कनेिंक्टग 
spurs बनाने थे, उसको shelve कर िदया गया है, उसको आगे और नहीं बढ़ा रहे हȅ।  मȅ आपको 
धन्यवाद देता हूं। 
 राजौरी-पुंछ की लाइन के िलए बहुत तेजी से सवȃ का काम भी चल रहा है, िजससे िक पूरा 
बॉडर्र एिरया कनेक्ट हो जाए और साथ ही साथ आप सबने देखा ही है िक िकस तरह से रेलवे 
लाइफ लाइन बन चुकी है।   
एक िवषय जो बार-बार कई फोरम मȂ उठाया जाता है िक hi gh altitude पर टर्ेन्स का 
ऑपरेशन होता है, उसका बहुत Îपेशल िडज़ाइन होता है।  High altitude पर Ģैशर बहुत कम 
होता है और जैसा हमने बफर्  के इस पूरे सीज़न मȂ देखा कंÃलीट टर्ेन के अंदर िजतना भी िलिक्वड 
का Äलो होता है, कई तर
ह की मूवमȂट मȂ, इंजन के मूवमȂट मȂ और कई चीज़ȗ मȂ, जहां िलिक्वड का 
Äलो होता है, उसके  िलए बहुत Îपेशल िडज़ाइन होता है, जो िक normal altitude से  बहुत 
                                                           
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
39

 
 
िडफरȂट है।  इसिलए ज्यादातर देशȗ मȂ high altitude के िलए अलग से टर्ेन्स रहती हȅ और low 
altitude से आने के बाद चȂज करते हȅ, तो मȅ आपके  माध्यम से आज उसके  बारे मȂ क्लेिरफाई 
करना चाहूंगा िक Îपेशल िडज़ाइन का जो िनणर्य िलया गया था, वह िनणर्य इस बफर्  के सीज़न मȂ 
एकदम सही िसǉ हुआ है िक Îपेशल िडज़ाइन ही रखनी चािहए।  नॉमर्ल टर्ेन्स को वहां ले जाने से 
टेक्नीकल ĢॉÅलम आती है।  वह भी सही िसǉ हुआ।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कÌमीर के सभी आवाम 
को यह बताना चाहूंगा।   
MR. CHAIRMAN:   No
w, Dr. John Brittas.  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Sir, I want your indulgence so that we get clarity on the whole 
gamut of issues, and I do not want the media in  Kerala to report it in a wrong way.  I 
have always held the hon. Minister in high  esteem.  He is very able and efficient.  
When it comes to Kerala, his efficiency is in being clever and evasive. Having said 
that, I come to my specific question.  Dr . E. Sreedharan has opened an office in 
Malappuram District for a high-speed railway pr oject in Kerala.  Has he done it as per 
his direction?  Is he going to allow this hi gh-speed project?  Or, as he indicated, is 
the Ministry of Railways going to reciprocate the Silver Line Railway Project, which he 
has been sitting over for so many years?  This is my specific question.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Whatever may be your question, he is capable of answering it.  Let 
him answer.   
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW :  Sir, the hon. Member, Dr . John Brittas, is very vocal, 
very erudite and highly knowledgeable Memb er, and the good thing about him is that 
in every aspect of a question, or an issue, he will find the absolutely opposite side and 
put it in a totally wrong way, and because of his good English... 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, you have to protect me. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I will protect you, but you also he lp him.  The land acquisition has 
to be done only by the State Government.  You are there in power for the past five 
years almost.  Then, you should help him.  
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW :  And, because of his journalistic background, he is able 
to put things in a totall
y wrong perspective.. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You should take his point airily.  He is going to give you the answer .  
Do not worry. ...(Interruptions)...  You are rounding; so he is rounding.  
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW :  I am giving a specific answer.  The hon. Member has 
raised a point about Dr. Sreedharan.  He is  one of those persons for whom the entire 
country has huge respect. The kind of work Dr.  Sreedharan has done, whether in 
Delhi Metro or the Konkan Railways, is phenomenal.  As an Engineer, I feel proud that 
Dr. Sreedharan keeps guiding me from time to  time. I call him, I request him, we sit 
together and, so many times, I take advice from him on multiple things.  If you would 
recall, Sir, in the current Budget, seve n new high-speed corridors have been 
announced by hon. Finance Minister.  In that regard also, I took Dr. Sreedharan’s 
guidance that the time has come when we should be doing more passenger corridors 
at a higher speed so that 140 crore people of our country get the benefit of that. Sir, 
regarding the point about Kerala and the o ffice that Dr. Sreedharan has opened, I 
always welcome any person in the country , who would like to contribute to the 
development of the country and development of the Railways.  Especi ally, if            
Dr. Sreedharan, who is well-versed with Railways, who understands the technology, 
who understands engineering, is opening an  office to support any initiative for 
development of Railways, we strongly welcome it. That is a very specific point.  I am 
saying, we welcome every such in itiative by Dr. Sreedharan. …( Interruptions)… The 
ball is in the court of the State Government.  I am saying it very clearly.  The ball is in 
the court of the State Government.  Let the State Government start the land 
acquisition.  …(Interruptions)… I will give one more example.  Kindly give me one more 
minute, Sir.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sure.   
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW : Let me give you the example of Angamaly-Sabarimala 
Railway Line.  Hon. Chairman, Sir, we purs ued the hon. Chief Minister and the State 
Government so many times.  Finally, becau se of our persuasion, the Chief Minister 
has started the land acquisition, maybe only because of the upcoming  
elections. …(Interruptions)… 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Sir, the hon. Minister is… …( Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Rahim ji, please. …( Interruptions)… That will apply to both  
sides.  …(Interruptions)…  Please mind it. …( Interruptions)…   Yes, hon. Minister.   
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW : Hon. Chairman, Sir, I don' t know what the agreement 
between the two sides, between the big players in Kerala, the Congress and the Left, 
is. I hope that the Angama ly-Sabarimala land acquisiti on continues beyond the 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
41

 
 
election also and when the BJP, the NDA, forms the Government in Kerala, we will 
make sure that the project goes ahead. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fifth supplementary, Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu. 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू: सर, मȅ सबसे पहले माननीय मंतर्ी जी का धन्यवाद करना चाहूँगा िक रेलवे 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर डेवलपमȂट के िलए पंजाब को इन्हȗने टॉप Ģायोिरटी पर रखा है। हमारे पंजाब मȂ नई 
रेल लाइन्स भी बन रही हȅ, हमारे रेलवे Îटेशन भी अपगर्ेड हो रहे हȅ और मुझे बताते हुए खुशी हो 
रही है िक जब हमारे बहुत सारे पंजाबी एनआरआईज़ आते हȅ, तो वे कÇ
पेयर करते हȅ िक आपका 
िवकिसत भारत कैसा लग रहा है। आज कÇपेयर करके  उन्हȂ लग रहा है िक हमारा िवकिसत भार
त 
बाकी डेवलÃड कंटर्ीज़ से बेहतर बन रहा है। मȅ रेलवे इंģाÎटर्क्चर के कंटेक्Îट मȂ बात कर रहा हूँ 
और खासकर जब हमारा चंडीगढ़ रेलवे Îटेशन देखते हȅ। सर, मȅ हाल ही मȂ जापान गया था, 
जापान से भी बेहतर हमारा चंडीगढ़ रेलवे Îटेशन बन रहा है। इसके  िलए मȅ सरकार का धन्यवाद 
करना चाहूँगा। 
सर, मेरा एक सुझाव भी है और एक सवाल भी है। पंजाब मȂ सबसे लंबा बॉ
डर्र साढ़े पाँच सौ 
िकलोमीटर से भी ज्यादा है - गुरदासपुर, िफरोज़पुर और फािजÊका। इन िडिÎटर्क्ट से हमारे बहुत 
सारे हमारे िडफȂस  पसर्नल और बॉडर्र एिरया के जो लोग हȅ। उनको देश के साथ बेहतर तरीके  से 
जोड़ने के िलए क्या बॉडर्र एिरया एक्सĢेस चलाने की कोई योजना हो सकती है या वहाँ से टर्ेन की 
मोिबिलटी बढ़ाई जा सकती है? मȅ यही सवाल पूछना चाहता हूँ। बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से देश के समक्ष यह रखना 
चाहूँगा िक माननीय Ģध
ानमंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने पंजाब के िलए इस बार 5,673 करोड़ रुपये 
का िरकॉडर् बजट allocate िकया है। माननीय सभापित जी, कांगर्ेस के सम
य जो बजट होता था, 
उसकी तुलना मȂ यह बजट पच्चीस गुना įयादा है। माननीय सांसद महोदय ने कहा है िक पंजाब मȂ 
एक के बाद एक नए Ģोजेक्ट्स आ रहे हȅ, तो मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक मेरे साथी Ǜी रवनीत िंसह जी 
पसर्नली पंजाब के सभी Ģोजेक्ट्स को मॉिनटर कर
ते हȅ और िकसी Ģोजेक्ट मȂ कहीं पर भी कोई 
िदक्कत होती है, तो वहाँ के जनĢितिनिधयȗ के सा
थ बातचीत करके , जनता के साथ बातचीत 
करके  बहुत ही Ģोएिक्टवली काम करते हȅ। मȅ हमारे Ǜी रवनीत िंसह जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा 
िक देश के साथ जो न्याय करना होता है, पंजाब के साथ जो न्याय करन ा होता है, वह आपने 
िकया है।  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, next Question… …(Interruptions)… 
सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी रामदास अठावले): इनके  ऊपर जो 
आरोप लगाया गया और इन्हȂ जो गǈार बोला गया, वह अच्छी बात नहीं  है।  
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKA R JUN KHARGE):  Sir, I want to say 
one thing.   
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am coming to you.  Yes, Mallikarjun ji.  ...(Interruptions)... I gave 
you so many minutes, but you were not allowing    t h e    h o n .  P r i m e  M i n i s t e r    t o   
speak.    That   is not correct. ...(Interruptions)... I always allow you.   
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, he spoke for 97 minutes.  ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, but you were not able to hear him.  That is the thing.  When 
you speak, they have to hear.  ...(Interruptions)... Just one minute, Mallikarjun 
Khargeji.  When you speak, they have to h ear it peacefully.  But when they speak, 
you also have to hear it peacefully.  That  is where democracy can grow.  Okay, now 
you speak. 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, I wanted to listen to him, but it was not worth it.   
So, I left.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, no.  Then they will also think lik e that.  Democracy is not about 
whether I like it or I do not like it.   
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  Sir, the Railway Minister is very friendly with Bittu, 
and he is also friendly with Brittas.  But while appreciating, it is mutual appreciation .  
They appreciate each other; he appreciated him and he also appreciated him.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You are very elderly.  You also appreciate every one of us.  
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  But the fact is that Bittu is sitting there and he is 
attacking Congress.  I think Bittu is responsible because he was with us and he knows 
everything.  ...(Interruptions)...   If it is any failure, it is my friend’s failure.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, first Supplementary, Shriman Mayankkumar.  
...(Interruptions)...  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Chairman, Sir, I have
 not appreciated him.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Don’t worry.  ...(Interruptions)... 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  I was just asking him... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Brittas ji , I will tell you one thing .  There is nothing wrong in 
appreciating the right thing.  There is nothing wrong in it.  Now, Question No.77.   
  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
43

 
 
Evaluation of digital agriculture initiatives 
#*77. SHRI MAYANKKUMAR NAYAK : Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether the Ministry has evaluated th e outcomes of digital agriculture 
initiatives  undertaken or continued in 2025, including AgriStack, Digital 
Crop Survey, Namo Drone Didi Scheme, Kisan e-Mitra and others; 
(b) if so, the details thereof, including fa rmer coverage, integration with land 
records and improvements in access to  credit, insurance and real-time 
advisory services; 
(c) whether the Ministry has assessed the impact of these initiatives on 
productivity, income levels and market linkages for farmers; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof, includin g coverage and measurable outcomes, 
State-wise? 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE (SHRI SHIVRAJ 
SINGH CHOUHAN): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of House.  
Statement 
(a) to (d) Yes Sir, the Government co nsistently evaluates the outcomes of 
digital agriculture initiatives undertaken or continued during 2025. Some of the major 
initiatives are as under: 
I. AgriStack: The AgriStack is a Digital Pub lic Infrastructure (DPI) which 
consists of three foundational registries or databases associated with the 
agriculture sector, i.e., the Farmers Re gistry, Geo-Referenced Village Maps, 
and Crop Sown Registry, all creat ed and maintained by the State 
Governments/ Union Territories. It establishes a  single source of truth  for 
farmer identity, land, and their crops. 
 
Farmer ID enables seamless integration of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
schemes such as Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojna (P M Kisan), 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna (P MFBY), Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
based procurement, access to credit deliv ery, input distribution, and disaster 
relief. As of 04.02.2026, more than 8.48 Crore Farmer IDs have been 
generated across the country. 
                                                           
# Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Digital Crop Survey has enabled plot-level visibility of crops and better 
estimation of sowing patterns across seasons, which in turn supports 
evidence-based planning for procuremen t, input supply and logistics. In 
Kharif 2025, the Digital Crop Survey (DCS) has been conducted in 604 
Districts covering more than 28.5 crores plots across the country.  
Maharashtra has successfully  leveraged AgriStack for  scheme delivery, 
disaster relief, Artificial Intelligence (A I)-based advisory, and providing credit 
access, including the transfer of  over ₹14,000 crore to 89 lakh farmers for 
Kharif 2025 crop losses. Chhattisgarh has institutionalized Farmer ID and 
Digital Crop Survey for  MSP-based paddy procurement, covering  over 32 
lakh farmers  in a single season, significantly improving transparency, crop 
verification, and timeliness of MSP payments. 
II. Krishi Decision Support System: Krishi Decision Support System is a geo-
spatial platform that integrates satellite imagery, weather, soil, and crop data 
using Geographic Information System (GIS) to support agricultural planning 
and decision-making. This acts as an analytical platform (web-portal) for 
developing targeted advisories on crop, weather and soil.  
 
III. Kisan e-Mitra: It is a voice-based Artificial  Intelligence (AI)-powered chatbot 
developed to assist farmers with responses to their queries on the PM Kisan 
Samman Nidhi scheme. This solution su pports 11 regional languages and is 
evolving to assist with other government programs. At present, it handles 
over 8,000farmer queries on an average da ily and so far, more than 95 lakh 
queries have been answered. 
 
IV. National Pest Surveillance System: The National Pest Surveillance System, 
for tackling the loss of produce due to climate change, utilizes AI and 
Machine Learning to detect pest infest ation in crop issues, enabling timely 
intervention for healthier crops. This tool, currently used by over 10,000 
extension workers, allows farmers to ca pture images of pests to help them 
mitigate pest attacks and reduce crop losses. At present, it supports 65 
crops and over 400 pests. 
 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
45

 
 
V. Namo Drone Didi : The Government has approved ‘Namo Drone Didi’ a 
Central Sector Scheme for providing 15 ,000 drones to the Women Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) with an outlay of Rs. 1261 Crores for the period from 2023-24 
to 2025-26. The major objectives of th e scheme are to promote advanced 
technology in agriculture for improved  efficiency, enhanced crop yield  
reduced cost of operation and to empo wer SHGs as drone service providers 
for increasing their income and provid ing livelihood support. Lead Fertilizer 
Companies (LFCs) have distributed 500 drones under the Namo Drone Didi 
Scheme. Agricultural Development and Rural Transformation Centre 
(ADRTC), Bangalore have carried out a study on the economics and 
business viability of drone operations on these 500 drones. The study 
indicates that the adoption of drones has diversified SHG activities, improved 
agricultural practices, and increased in come opportunities for women in rural 
communities. 
 
VI. Seed Authenticity Traceability  Holistic Inventory (SATHI): It provides a digital 
platform that streamlines the holistic ma nagement of seed production, quality 
certification, distribution, and traceab ility pan-India. This endeavor 
establishes a National Seed Grid (NSG ), integrating all seed stakeholders 
within a unified national digital platform. 
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक: सर, माननीय कृिष मंतर्ी जी ने मेरे ĢÌन का उǄर िदया है। इस देश की 
सरकार माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ और कृिष मंतर्ी आदरणीय िश वराज 
िंसह जी के नेतृत्व मȂ िकसानȗ का कÊयाण हो, वैसे कायर् कर रही है। 
मेरा पहला ĢÌन यह है िक वतर्मान मȂ िकसान रिजÎटर्ी िकन-िकन राज् यȗ  मȂ हुई है? उसकी 
तैयारी भी की जा चुकी है। मȅ संसद के इस Äलोर पर आज यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक िजन राज्यȗ मȂ 
अभी िकसान रिजÎटर्ी नहीं बनी है, तो इसके  Ģमुख कारण क्या हȅ?  
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महो दय, हमारे िवǎान सांसद, Ǜी मयंककुमार 
नायक जी ने आज बड़ा महत्वपूणर् सवाल पूछा है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी,          
Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी कृिष नीित के तीन Ģमुख लÑय हȅ। नÇबर एक, िकसानȗ की 
आय बढ़ाना। नÇबर दो, देश की खाǏ सुरक्षा सुिनिÌचत करना। नÇबर ती
न, हमारी जनता को 
पोषणयुƪ आहार उपलÅध कराना। इसके  िलए हमारी छ: सूतर्ीय रणनीित है। पहली, उत्पादन 
बढ़ाना। दूसरी, उत्पादन की लागत घटाना। तीसरी, उत्पादन के ठीक दा म देना। चौथी, अगर 
नुकसान हो जाए, तो नुकसान की भरपाई करना। पाँचवीं, फसल का िविवधीकरण और छठवीं, 
आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ के िलए भी यह धरती फसल उत्पादन करने के लायक रहे, इसका Ģयत्न 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
करना। इसके  िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ हम टेक्नोलॉजी का भरपूर Ģयोग कर रहे हȅ। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, जब उधर की सरकार थी, तो उनके  कायर्काल मȂ िडिजटल कृिष का 
कभी ठोस उपयोग नहीं हुआ।  िकसान अन्नदाता है, अन्नदा ता मतलब जीवनदाता और 
जीवनदाता भगवान के बराबर होता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... िकसानȗ की सेवा हमारे िलए भगवान की 
पूजा है। इसिलए िकसान की हालत बदलने के िलए हमने कृिष के िलए िडिजटल पिÅलक 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर के िनमार्ण की घोषणा की है। जब उधर की सरकार थी, तब केवल कागजȗ पर काम 
होता था। मोदी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ तो िडिजटली िकसानȗ की िÎथित बदलने के िलए युǉ Îतर पर 
काम िकए जा रहे हȅ। इसि
लए हमने िकसान रिजÎटर्ी बनाने का फैसला िकया।  िकसान रिजÎटर्ी मȂ 
मुख्य रूप से हम फामर्र आईडी बनाने का काम कर रहे हȅ। अब भारत के हर एक िकसान की एक 
अलग पहचा
न होगी।  उसके  पास िजतनी जमीन है, उस जमीन का िववरण, जमीन मȂ बोई गई 
फसलȗ का िववरण, उस के  पास जो पशुधन है, उसका िववरण, उसके  पिरवार मȂ िजतने सदÎय 
हȅ, उनका िववरण, ये सारी जानकारी रहेगी।  माननीय मयंककुमार नायक जी ने ĢÌन पूछा है, 
उसके  संबंध मȂ मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूं िक अब तक देश के 19 राज्यȗ मȂ िकसान रिजÎटर्ी तैयार 
करने की Ģिकर्या Ģगित पर है और मुझे यह बताते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक अब तक 8 करोड़ 47 लाख 
से अिधक िकसानȗ की आईडी बनाई जा चुकी है। िकसान रिजÎटर्ी के िलए भूिम िरकॉडर् का 
िडिजटल होना जरूरी है। राज्
यȗ मȂ भूिम के िरकॉडर् को िडिजटल करने का काम लगातार चल रहा 
है। 19 राज्यȗ  मȂ िकसान आईडी बन रही है।  आंधर् Ģदेश, असम, िबहार, छǄीसगढ़, गुजरात, 
हिरयाणा, िहमाचल Ģदेश, कणार्टक, केरल, मध्य Ģदेश, महाराÍटर्, ओिडश ा, पंजाब, राजÎथान, 
तिमलनाडु, तेलंगाना, ितर्पुरा, उǄर Ģदेश और  उǄराखंड मȂ काम जारी है।  हम गोवा, िसिक्कम, 
जÇमू-कÌमीर इन तीन राज्यȗ मȂ िकसान रिजÎटर्ी का काम शुरू करने जा रहे हȅ। माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, अंडमान िनकोबार, अरुणाचल Ģदेश, िमजोरम, मेघालय, नागालȅड, पुडुचेरी, मिणपुर, 
लक्षǎीप, लǈाख और झ
ारखंड, इन राज्यȗ मȂ अभी लȅड िरकॉड्सर् नहीं है, लेिकन हम गंभीर हȅ। 
सरकार वहां की राज्य सरकार को तकनीकी सहायता के रूप मȂ सेटेलाइट िचतर् के आधार पर 
िजओ रेफरȂÎड Ãलॉट मैÃस तैयार कर
ने मȂ मदद कर रही है। इसके  अितिरƪ राज्यȗ को उनके  
Ģपोज़ल के आधार पर िवǄीय सहायता भी Ģदान की जा रही है।  
Ǜी सभापित: सेकंड सÃलीमȂटर्ी, Ǜी मयंककुमार नायक जी।  
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक:  माननीय Ģधा
न मंतर्ी जी िकसान सÇमान िनिध के माध्यम से देश के सभी 
िकसानȗ को साल मȂ 6,000 रुपय े टर्ांसफर करते हȅ। यह युग टेक्नोलॉजी का युग है और 
टेक्नोलॉजी कृिष क्षेतर् मȂ भी उपयोग मȂ लाई जानी चािहए।  क्या सरकार ने फसल की उ त्पादकता 
बढ़ाने के िलए, िकसानȗ की आजीिवका मȂ सुधार लाने के िलए तथा कृिष क्षेतर् की िविभन्न 
चुनौितयां का समाधान करने के िलए आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिल ज Ȃस की िविधयȗ का उपयोग शुरू 
िकया है?  
Ǜी सभापित: ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर। 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
47

 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, हम िकसानȗ की समÎया के समाधान की 
िंचता करते हȅ।  इसिलए मुझे यह बताते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक मोदी जी की सरकार है, िजसने 
िकसानȗ की उत्पादकता बढ़ाने के िलए और आजीिवका मȂ सुधार लाने के िलए एआई का उपयोग 
करने का फैसला िकया है। इसके  िलए हमने एक नहीं, अनेकȗ योजन
ाएं बनाई हȅ।  उनमȂ से  
एक है - िकसान ई-िमतर्।  यह आवाज आधािरत एआई चैट बॉट है।   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, पीएम िकसान सÇमान िनिध हो, फसल बीमा योजना हो, 
िकसान कर्ेिडट काडर् से जुड़ी समÎयाएं हȗ, तो िकसान अपने सवाल इस चैट बॉट के माध्यम से 
पूछता है और उसको तत्
काल जवाब िमलता है।  यह केवल िंहदी और अंगर्ेजी मȂ नहीं है।  मुझे यह 
बताते हुए Ģसन्
नता है िक 11 क्षेतर्ीय भाषाओं मȂ िकसानȗ के सवाल का जवाब देने का काम एआई 
के माध्यम से िकया जा रहा है।  अब तक लगभग 93 लाख ĢÌनȗ के उǄर िदए जा चुके हȅ। Ģितिदन 
लगभग 8,000 सवाल  पूछे जाते हȅ और उनका समाधान एआई के माध्यम से हमारा कृिष िवभाग 
देने का काम कर रहा है।                                                   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, वैसे ही कई बार फस
लȗ मȂ कीट लग जाते हȅ, वायरस अटैक 
हो जाता है। जब फसल खराब होती है, तब िकस ान को जरूरत पड़ती है िक वह तत्काल सलाह 
ले।  अब हमने एक नेशनल पेÎट सवȃलांस िसÎटम बनाया है। अगर िकसान मोबाइल के माध्यम से 
अपने पौधे की पǄी की फोटो खींच कर डाल देता है, तो तत्काल उसको बताया जा ता है िक कौन 
सा रोग है, कौन से कीट का Ģकोप है और उससे बचने के िलए िकसान को कौन सी दवाई डालनी 
चािहए। हम राÍटर्ीय कीट िनगरानी Ģणाली के माध्यम से यह काम भी कर रहे हȅ।   
 माननीय सभ
ापित महोदय, इसके  अलावा एआई के माध्यम से मानसून के पूवार्नुमान की 
सूचना भी दी जाती है। पहले चार सÃताह की, िफर तीन सÃताह पहले, िफर दो सÃताह पहले और 
िफर एक सÃताह पहले भी बताया जाता है िक वष ार् कब होगी, िकतनी होगी, होगी िक नहीं होगी, 
िकसान को अभी फसल बोनी चािहए िक नहीं बोनी चािहए। हमने एआई के माध्यम से यह सारी 
जानकारी देने का काम िकया है। अब तो मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को ǭदय से धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक 'भारत 
िवÎतार' नामक एक नया Ãलेटफॉमर्  बनाया जा रहा है। यह सारे ÃलेटफॉÇसर् को एक
ीकृत  करके  
एक जगह करेगा और िकसान की हर समÎया, चाहे वह योजनाओं की जानकारी हो, चाहे अच्छे 
बीज हȗ, खाद डालने की बात हो, रोगȗ के िनयंतर्ण का मामला हो, वह कब फस ल बोए, कब 
फसल न बोए या योजनाओं का कैसे लाभ ले, इसके  िलए कहीं भटकने की जरूरत नहीं है। वह 
केवल सवाल पूछेगा और 'भारत िवÎतार' के माध्यम से उसको उǄर िमल जाएगा और वह अपनी 
खेती को बेहतर कर पाएगा। इस तरह से टेक्नोलॉ
जी का इÎतेमाल करके  मोदी सरकार यह काम 
कर रही है। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary; Shri Paka Venkata Satyanarayana. 
SHRI PAKA VENKATA SATYANARAYANA : Mr. Chairman, Sir, I thank you for giving 
me this opportunity.  As the nation has wi tnessed the importance of agriculture at a 
very crucial time of Covid, I would lik e to know, through you, from the hon . Minister: 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
How is this Government, through Digital Agricultural Mission, encouraging or 
proposing to encourage farming among th e youth either as entrepreneurial or 
profitable activity? In what ways will the Digital Agriculture Mission enable the 
Government agencies to deliver its servi ces to the farmers more effectively and 
efficiently?  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, डाटा एक ताकत है। टेक्नोलॉजी और डाटा 
आज के युग मȂ एक बड़ी ताकत हȅ। मुझे यह कहते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक िडिजटल एगर्ीकÊचर िमशन 
के माध्यम से युवा पीढ़ी कैसे नवाचार, इन्नोवेशन करे; कैसे उǏ िमता के क्षेतर् मȂ तेजी से आगे बढ़े; 
इसके  िलए काम िकया जा रहा है। मुझे यह बताते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक खेती के क्षेतर् मȂ कई युवा िन त 
नए Ģयोग कर रहे हȅ। वे खेती मȂ भी Ģयोग कर रहे हȅ और हॉिर्टकÊचर मȂ अलग Ģयोग कर रहे हȅ। 
उनके  िदमाग, उनका जो टैलȂट है, उसका इÎतेमाल करके  हम Îटाटर्अप कÊचर लेकर आ रहे हȅ।  
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, इसिलए कृिष मȂ नवाचार हो, Îटाटर्अÃस आएं; नौजवान अप
ने 
टैलȂट का इÎतेमाल करके  उत्पादन बढ़ाएं; इसके  िलए एिगर् Îटैक का लाभ उठा कर वे अनेक तरह 
की जानकािरयां ĢाÃत सकते हȅ; ई-नाम पोटर्ल के माध्यम से िकसानȗ को नया बाजार तलाशने मȂ 
मदद कर सकते हȅ; उत्पादन मȂ िविवधत
ा लाने के Ģयास कर सकते हȅ; िकसानȗ को बेहतर मूÊय 
कैसे िमल सकता है, इसमȂ वे जानकािरयां जुटा सकते हȅ; आय कैसे बढ़े, वे कौन सी खेती करȂ, 
वैÊयू एिडश
न कैसे हो, इसमȂ वे मदद कर सकते हȅ। युवा Îटाटर्अÃस, इन्नोवेटसर् और अन्य 
एजȂसीज़ एिगर् Îटैक के डाटा का उपयोग िकसानȗ के िलए उनके  उत्पादȗ के बेहतर समाधान के 
िलए कर सकती हȅ; बेहतर सेवाओं के िवकास के िलए कर सकती हȅ। इसके  अलावा, वे जीआईएस 
मैिंपग से संबंिधत डाटा का लाभ उठा कर नए समाधान तैयार कर सकते हȅ, जो िकसानȗ और 
समगर् कृिष के िलए फायदेमंद होगा। वे िडिजटल कर्ॉप सवȃ करने मȂ, युवा कृिष सखी सवȃक्षण करने 
मȂ और राज्
यȗ की नीित के अनुसार योगदान करके  अपनी आय बढ़ाने मȂ और आय और बेहतर 
करने मȂ इस का उपयोग कर सकते हȅ।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary; Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha. 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA: Sir, I thank you for giving me this opportunity 
to raise the supplementary question. While digi tal agriculture initiatives such as Agri 
Stack and digital crop survey are intended to improve service delivery to farmers, 
timely settlement of crop insurance claims remains critical, especially for crops with 
short production cycles of three months or less. Delays in assessment and payout can 
significantly affect farmers’ liquidity and their ability to reinvest in the next crop cycles. 
In this context, I would like to ask the hon. Minister, through you:  “Are these digital 
agriculture platforms being leveraged to  fast track crop loss assessment and 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
49

 
 
insurance claim processing?  What measures  are being taken to ensure time-bound 
settlement for short duration crops? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister.  
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने यह बहुत महत्वपूणर् 
सवाल पूछा है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी फसल बीमा योजना, िजन िकसानȗ की फसलȂ तबाह और बबार्द हो 
जाती हȅ, उनके  िलए वरदान है।  मुझे बताते हुए खुशी है िक करोड़ȗ िकसानȗ ने फसल बीमा 
योजना का लाभ उठाया है।  आपने िबलकुल सही कहा िक िनिÌचत समय सीमा के अंदर िकसानȗ 
को फसल बीमा के अंतगर्त फायदा िमलना चािहए, अगर उनकी फसल का नुकसान हुआ है।  
महोदय, मȅ इसके  बारे मȂ आपको बताना चाहूंगा िक हमने 2 करोड़, 90 लाख िकसान आईडी को 
राÍटर्ीय फसल बीमा पोटर्ल से जोड़ने का काम िकया है।  िकसान आईडी के माध्यम से - मȅ केवल 
एक उदाहरण महाराÍटर् सरकार का देना चाहूंगा।  वहां फसलȗ का नुकसान हुआ, असमय बािरश 
के कारण Ëयापक नुकसान हुआ।  सैटेलाइट आधािरत िरमोट सȂिंसग के माध्यम से 89 लाख 
िकसानȗ की फसल की क्षित का आकलन 5 िदन के अंदर करके , उन 89 लाख िकसानȗ के खाते मȂ 
14 करोड़ रुपए सीधे टर्ांसफर करने का चमत्कार इसी के कारण संभव हुआ और इसिलए मȅ 
माननीय सदÎय को आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं।   
महोदय, हमने फसल बीमा योजना मȂ भी कई तरह के पिरवतर्न िकए।  जैसे, आपने देरी 
की एक बात कही, तो हमने यह तय कर िदया है िक राज्य सरकार को एक महीने के अंदर - वहां 
जो नुकसान हुआ है, िरमोट सȂिंसग के माध्यम से तो उसका तत्काल पता चलता है िक िकतना 
नुकसान हुआ है।  कई राज्य सरकारȂ अभी इसको नहीं अपना रही हȅ, लेिकन एक महीने के अंदर 
उनको क्षित का आकलन करके  जानकारी देनी पड़ेगी िक नुकसान िकतना हुआ है और उसके  
बाद सारी औपचािरकताएं पूरी होने के बाद, यह जरूरी है िक बीमा कंपनी 21 िदन के अंदर claim 
settle कर दे।  अगर 21 िदन के अंदर बीमा कंपनी claim settle नहीं करेगी, तो 12 परसȂट की दर 
से उन पर Åयाज लगेगा, िजसे िकसान के खाते मȂ सीधा डालने का काम िकया जाएगा।  कई बार 
राज्य सरकार उसमȂ अपना िहÎसा नहीं डालती, कȂदर् का अपना पैसा दे देती है, मȅ िकसी एक 
राज्य सरकार की बात नहीं कर रहा।  इसमȂ कई बार िडले होता है।  हमने यह भी तय िकया है िक 
अगर ऐसा िडले हुआ, तो 12 परसȂट Åयाज राज्य सरकार के ऊपर भी लगाया जाएगा, जो सीधे 
िकसान के खाते मȂ डाला जाएगा।  इस Ģकार, एक तो टेक्नोलॉजी का इÎतेमाल करके  तत्काल 
claim settle हो जाए, हम लोग लगातार इस बात का Ģयत्न कर रहे हȅ। माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िकसान भाइयȗ को आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं िक चाहे बीमा हो या 
ऋण हो - पहले अगर िकसान को लोन लेना होता था, तो बȅकȗ मȂ कई तरह के कागजȗ की पूिर्त 
करनी पड़ती थी िक अब यह ले आओ, अब यह ले आओ।  अब अगर उसके  पास िकसान आईडी 
है, farmer ID है, तो सारा िरकॉडर् उस farmer ID मȂ उसके  पास है, वह उसे बȅक मȂ रखेगा और 
तत्काल उसको लोन िमल जाएगा, जैसे पीएम िकसान सÇमान िनिध तत्काल टर्ांसफर होकर 
डीबीटी के माध्यम से उसके  खाते मȂ पहुंच जाती है।   
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, अब वे िदन चले गए, जब कहा जाता था िक क्या करȂ, हम 
मजबूर हȅ, हम एक रुपया भेजते हȅ, तो 15 पैसे ही पहुंचते हȅ।  अब तो click करो, तो एक रुपये का 
एक रुपया सीधे िकसान के खाते मȂ पहुंचता है।  यह चमत्कार नरेन्दर् मोदी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ  
हो रहा है। 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary, Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara.   
Ǜीमती रिमलाबेन बेचारभाई बारा :  सभापित जी, िकसानȗ के िलए कÊयाणकारी योजनाओं मȂ 
िडिजटल पहल एक कर्ांितकारी कदम है।  मȅ इसके  िलए देश के Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय मोदी जी को 
और कृिष मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देती हूँ और आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहती हूँ 
िक िडिजटल पहल मȂ आपने 'िकसान ई-िमतर्' की एक पहल की है।  इस पहल के माध्यम से 
िकसानȗ की ओर से िकतने ĢÌन िमले हȅ और उनका समाधान कैसे िकया गया है? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister.   
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅने जैसा Ģारंभ मȂ िनवेदन िकया था, रोज 
लगभग 8,000 सवाल पूछे जाते हȅ और लगभग 93 लाख िकसानȗ के सवालȗ के जवाब दे िदए गए 
हȅ।  िकसान िजस भाषा मȂ सवाल पूछते हȅ, मȅने 11 क्षेतर्ीय भाषाओं का िजकर् िकया।  बहन, केवल 
िंहदी या अंगर्ेजी मȂ नहीं, अगर िकसान गुजराती मȂ भी सवाल पूछȂगे, तो उनको गुजराती मȂ उǄर 
िमलेगा; पंजाबी मȂ पूछȂगे तो पंजाबी मȂ िमलेगा; बंगाली मȂ पूछȂगे तो बंगाली मȂ िमलेगा। तिमल मȂ 
पूछȂगे, तो तिमल मȂ जवाब िमलेगा और केरल से पूछȂगे,   तो   मलयालम  मȂ   जवाब िमलेगा।   
लगातार  इन ĢÌनȗ का तत्काल जवाब देने का काम हो रहा है।  अब तो एक ही Ãलेटफॉमर् पर 
'भारत िवÎतार' के अंतगर्त सारी चीजȂ आ जाएँगी, तो कृिष से संबंिधत िकसी भी मामले मȂ िकसान 
सवाल पूछेगा, तो जवाब हािजर होगा और वह अपनी खेती को और बेहतर बना सकेगा। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question No.78. 
Surplus/Shortfall of revenue of Indian Railways 
*78. DR. LAXMIKANT BAJPAYEE: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to 
state: 
(a)   the Operating Ratio and Net Revenue acc rued to Railways in the last three    
years, year-wise;  
(b)   the Compound Annual Growth Rate  of Railways Gross Traffic Receipts in 
the last three years; and 
(c)    the Zonal Railway-wise Surplus / Shortfall generated in the last three 
years? 
 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
51

 
 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW):  (a) to (c) A Statement 
is laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
(a) to (c) The Operating Ratio, Gross Traffic Receipts and Net Revenue of 
Indian Railways in the last three Financial Year (FY) is given below: 
                                                                           (Rs. in crore) 
 
 
 
CAGR of Railways Gross Traffic Recei pts in 2024-25 over 2022-23 is 5.1%. 
The Zonal Railway-wise Surplus/Shortfall are available in Annual Statistical Statement 
of Indian Railways which is availa ble on website of Indian Railways 
(https://indianrailways.gov.in). 
MR. CHAIRMAN: First supplementary; Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee. 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी: माननीय सभापित जी, रेलवे के पिरचालन अनुपात से उसके  िवǄीय 
मापदंड का पता लगता है।  मेरी जानकारी के मुतािबक 2024-25 मȂ यह 98.22 Ģितशत अनुमािनत 
है, िजसका अथर् पिरचालन का खचर् है।  यह अनुपात िजतना कम होगा, वह रेलवे के िलए उतना 
बेहतर माना जाएगा।  मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक पिरचालन अनुपात इतना 
अिधक होने के क्या कारण हȅ और इसमȂ सरकार ने िपछले कुछ वषș मȂ क्या Ģयत्न िकए हȅ तथा 
भिवÍय मȂ क्या Ģयत्न करȂगे? साथ-साथ बेरोजगारी दूर करने मȂ या लोगȗ को नौकरी देने के मामले 
मȂ रेलवे की क्या पिरिÎथित है - यह मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूँ।  
Ǜी सभापित: ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर। 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: सभापित जी, हमारे विरÍठ सांसद और हम सबके  बहुत ही respected       
डा. लÑमीकान्त वाजपेयी जी ने बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् ĢÌन पूछा है िक रेलवे की financial position 
कैसी है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सांसद जी को बताना चाहूँगा िक िपछले 10 वषș मȂ बहुत ही 
concerted तरीके  से जो efforts हुए हȅ और माननीय पीयूष गोयल जी यहाँ पर बैठे हȅ, इन्हȗने एक 
बहुत ही systematic तरीके  से रेलवे का freight को बढ़ाने, पैसȂजर का रेवेन्यू बढ़ाने, कॉÎट पर 
कंटर्ोल लाने का काम िकया।  इस तरह से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी के नेतृत्व मȂ इन 10 वषș मȂ रेलवे 
Financial Year Operating Ratio Gross Traffic Receipts Surplus 
2022-23 98.10% 2,39,983 2,517 
2023-24 98.43% 2,55,273 3,260 
2024-25 98.22% 2,65,114 2,660 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
की financial health मȂ बहुत सुधार आया है।  ओवरऑल, अगर हम िसचुएशन देखȂ, तो रेलवे के 
Îटाफ की टोटल कॉÎट करीब 1,18,000 करोड़ रुपए है।  करीब 12 लाख के आस-पास एÇÃलॉइज़ 
हȅ और 15 लाख के आस-पास पȂशनसर् हȅ।  पȂशन की कॉÎट करीब 65,000 करोड़ रुपए है, एनजीर् 
की कॉÎट करीब 32,000 करोड़ रुपए है, financing की कॉÎट करीब 23,000 करोड़ रुपए है और 
8,000 करोड़ रुपए के आस-पास मȂटेनȂस की कॉÎट है।  ये जो बड़े खचȃ हȅ, वे हȅ। ओवरऑल, 
करीब 2,74,000 करोड़ रुपए की टोटल कॉÎट आती है। 
 िजस तरह के ÎटेÃस माननीय पीयूष जी ने िलए थे, उनसे पहले माननीय सुरेश Ģभु जी ने 
िलए थे और इस पूरे दशक मȂ जो ÎटेÃस िलए गए, उनके  कारण रेलवे अपना सारा खचार् meet 
करके  एक छोटा-सा surplus अभी बना पा रही है।  इसमȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का जो एक बहुत दूरदशीर् 
िनणर्य था, उस िनणर्य की भूिमका बहुत बड़ी है।  िजस तरह से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने िनणर्य 
िलया िक रेलवे को completely िवǏुतीकरण करȂगे, पूरे देश के नेटवकर्  का िवǏुतीकरण करȂगे, 
उसका जो benefit देश को हुआ, उसको मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बताना चाहता हूँ।  Environment के 
point of view से तो benefit हुआ ही हुआ, डीजल के comparison मȂ इलेिक्टर्कल िसÎटम का 
environmental impact करीब-करीब 95 परसȂट बेटर होता है, लेिकन जो financial benefit 
हुआ, वह भी  आपके  माध्यम से रखना चाहूँगा।  एनजीर् की कॉÎट, एनजीर् मȂ डीजल और 
इलेिक्टर्कल एनजीर्, दोनȗ िमला कर जो कॉÎट आती है, वह कुछ साल पहले करीब-करीब 
37,841 करोड़ रुपए थी, वह कम होकर अब 32,400 करोड़ रुपए रह गई है, जबिक टर्ैिफक 
करीब-करीब 400 िमिलयन टन अिधक हुआ है।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने electrification करने 
का जो दूरदशीर् िनणर्य िलया, उसका double benefit हुआ - एक तो environmental benefit 
हुआ और financial benefit भी हुआ। 
 माननीय सांसद जी ने एÇÃलॉयमȂट के संबंध मȂ जो दूसरा ĢÌन पूछा, उसके  संबंध मȂ मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सांसद जी को बताना चाहूँगा िक 2014 से 2024 के  बीच मȂ करीब 
5,04,000 लोगȗ को रोजगार िदया गया और माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की इस तीसरी टमर् मȂ करीब 
डेढ़ लाख लोगȗ को रोजगार देने का काम लगातार चल रहा है और उसमȂ बहुत अच्छी Ģोगर्ेस है। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, Assistant Loco Pilots की 18,000 वैकȂसी का Ģोसेस कंÃलीट हो गया 
है, पायलट्स अभी ज्वाइन कर रहे हȅ। 450  RPF  Sub-Inspectors  का   Ģोसेस  कंÃलीट  हो  
गया   है   और  अब   उनके  अपॉइंटमȂट लेटसर् भेजे जा रहे हȅ।  4, 200 RPF Constables का first 
stage exam complete हो गया है।  14,300 टेक्नीिशयंस का Ģोसेस कंÃलीट हुआ है। जूिनयर 
इंजीिनयर, 8,000 ; पैरामेिडकल, 1,300;  NTPC गर्ेजुएट, यानी Îटेशन माÎटर वगैरह की 
कैटेगरीज़ मȂ 8,000 पोÎट्स के एग्जाम हो गए हȅ और उनमȂ आगे का Ģोसेस चल रहा है।  Overall, 
करीब 2.5 crore applicants हȅ और हर क्षेतर्ीय भाषा मȂ, जैसा िक हमारे विरÍठ मंतर्ी, Ǜी िशवराज 
िंसह जी ने अभी एगर्ीकÊचर मȂ बताया, उसी तरह से रेलवे मȂ भी 15 भाषाओं मȂ परीक्षाएँ चल रही हȅ।  
150 शहरȗ मȂ, हर जगह तीन-तीन िशÄट मȂ, कई जगह दो िशÄट मȂ, कई जगह िंसगल िशÄट मȂ 
एग्जाÇस हो रहे हȅ।  माननीय सभापित महोदय, वॉर रूम बना हुआ है।  अगर िकसी भी एग्जाम 
सȂटर से छोटी से छोटी कंÃलȂट भी आती है, तो उस पर तुरंत ऐक्शन िलया जाता है, क्यȗिक हमारे 
युवाओं की जो aspiration है िक वे रेलवे के साथ जुड़Ȃ, उसमȂ एकदम टर्ांसपेरȂसी के साथ, एकदम 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
53

 
 
पारदिर्शता के साथ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने जो फाउंडेशन रखी है, जो मागर्दशर्न िदया है, उसी 
के माध्यम से अभी करीब-करीब डेढ़ लाख और लोगȗ को रोजगार िदया जा रहा है। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee. 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी: माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने देश मȂ रेलवे Îटेशनȗ के सुधार के िलए  वचुर्अली िशलान्यास िकया था, 
िजसमȂ मेरठ रेलवे Îटेशन भी है।  इस वƪ मेरठ रेलवे Îटेशन के सुधार कायर् की क्या िÎथित है, 
यह मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से आपके  माध्यम से जानना चाहता हूँ।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मेरठ इितहास मȂ एक ऐसा Îथान रखता है, जो िक 
हमारे पहले Îवतंतर्ता संगर्ाम से जुड़ा हुआ है।  िजस तरह का मेरठ का इितहास है, उसके  िहसाब 
से Îटेशन बने, इस कÊपना के साथ Îटेशन का िडजाइन बनाया गया था।  उसका जो पहला 
िडजाइन बना, वह एक बहुत मॉडनर् तरीके  का िडजाइन था, िजसमȂ इितहास को िरÄलेक्ट नहीं 
िकया जा रहा था।  इसीिलए, मȅ माननीय सांसद, डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी जी, जो िक हमारे 
विरÍठ साथी हȅ और हम सबको बहुत गाइडȂस देते हȅ, इनसे मȅने पसर्नली िरक्वेÎट िकया िक आप 
मेरठ के सभी विरÍठ नागिरकȗ तथा समाज के और भी िजतने विरÍठ लोग हȅ, उन सबके  साथ 
िमलकर बैिठए और इस िवषय पर उनकी राय लीिजए िक क्या हम मेरठ के Îवतंतर्ता आंदोलन की 
झलक मेरठ Îटेशन मȂ दे सकते हȅ?  जब वहाँ िरकंÎटर्क्शन हो रहा है और उसमȂ इतनी बड़ी 
इन्वेÎटमȂट हो रही है, तो उसमȂ अगले 50, 60, 100 साल के िलए एक िवज़न होना चािहए। उसके  
िलए मȅ माननीय सांसद, बाजपेयी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा िक आपने बहुत इिनिशएिटव 
िलया।  आपने सभी को बुलाया, सभी को जोड़ा और सबको जोड़ने के बाद आपने एक नया 
िडजाइन िदया है और उस नए िडजाइन के िहसाब से अभी वहाँ काम चल रहा है।   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, जैसा िक मȅने पहले भी कहा िक जब टर्ैिफक चलता है, तब उस 
ऑनगोइंग टर्ैिफक मȂ कंÎटर्क्शन काम मȂ बहुत सावधािनयाँ बरतनी पड़ती हȅ, जैसा िक अभी 
चंडीगढ़ का िवषय भी आया था।  हालाँिक चालू टर्ैिफक मȂ बहुत ही केयरफुली और बहुत ही सेÄटी 
का ध्यान रखकर काम करना होता है, िफर भी वहाँ काम बहुत तेजी से हो रहा है।  दुिनया मȂ ऐसे 
कई बड़े examples हȅ।  मान लीिजए, जमर्नी मȂ बिर्लन एक example है, तो वहाँ पर करीब-करीब 
8 या 10 वषș मȂ टोटल िरकंÎटर्क्शन हुआ।  यहाँ पर बहुत ही तेजी से सब जगह काम हो रहा है।  
Despite the traffic being on, despite the cont inuing traffic, with all proper safety 
measures, we are moving at a very fast pace.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: Sir, through you, I would like to compliment the 
hon. Minister because in the political history of India, this is for the first time that the 
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
North-Eastern region of country has been fully connected by railways . Sir, it is for the 
first time that Rajdhani Train is running from Delhi to Aizawl . Now, all the eight 
Northeastern Region States are well connected with the Railways .  Sir, for better 
development of the Railway, Zonal Railways play s a very important role.  And, in your 
written reply, you have stated in which zone, you are getting the financial benefit .   I 
am not sure!  Sir, my question is very simple .  Our hon . Prime Minister has given 
priority to the Northeastern region.   Is the hon. Minister considering, for better railway 
connectivity and better railway development, to create a separate Railway Zone with 
North Eastern State? 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, नॉथर् ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स मȂ िजतना ध्यान माननीय 
Ģधानमंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िदया है, वैसा ध्यान इितहास मȂ कभी भी नॉथर् ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स को 
नहीं िदया ग
या। माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी Îवयं नॉथर् ईÎट इतनी बार गए हȅ। चाहे रेलवे कनेिक्टिवटी 
हो, चाहे टेलीकॉम कनेिक्टिवटी हो, एयर कनेिक्टिवटी हो या हाईवे कनेिक्टिवटी, हर एक 
एÎपेक्ट पर personally फोकस करते हुए माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने नॉथर् ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स के िलए 
लगातार बजट भी बढ़ाया है और काम का review भी िकया है। 
अगर हम नॉथर् ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स की बा
त करȂ, तो इस समय िरकॉडर् बजट 11,486 करोड़ 
रुपये का है, जो िक यूपीए समय मȂ मातर् 2,000 करोड़ रुपये हुआ करता था। अब काम मȂ भी बहुत 
तेज़ी आई है। भले ही बहुत challenging terrain है, लेिकन इसके  बावजूद बहुत detail मȂ जाकर 
कायर् िक
या जा रहा है। खासकर जो िहमालयन िजयोलॉजी है - िहमालयन माउंटȂस बहुत ही 
young mountains हȅ  - यहाँ िडज़ाइन और िनमार्ण करना अपने आप मȂ एक बहुत complex 
exercise होती है। वहां rock formati
on कम है और rock formation और  sand से बीच मȂ जो 
Îटेज होती है, वह formation įयादा है।  बहुत सी जगहȗ पर steep valleys हȅ, बहुत जगह 
टनÊस बनती हȅ, िपछले ग्
यारह वषș मȂ िरकॉडर् संख्या मȂ tunnels बनाई गई हȅ। कुल िमलाकर नॉथर् 
ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स के िलए बड़ा फोकस, बड़ा बजट और तेज़ी से कायर् िकया जा रहा है। जैसा िक 
माननीय सांसद महोदय ने अभी कहा िक आइजोल तक टर्ेन सेवा शुरू हो गई है। हाल ही मȂ 
माननीय मुख्यमंतर्ी जी भी आए थे। उन्
हȗने बताया िक आइजोल तक रेलवे कनेिक्टिवटी शुरू होने 
के बाद वहाँ सीमȂट और   अन्य   कई   material   की   c ost  मȂ कमी आई है। अब यातर्ी बहुत 
आसानी से गुवाहाटी, िदÊली, कोलकाता और देश के अन्य भागȗ से जुड़ पा रहे हȅ। इसका बहुत 
positive benefit है। वाÎतव मȂ माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने जो नॉथर् ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स पर फोकस िकया 
था, उसका benefit अब िमल रहा है। 
जहाँ तक नॉ
थर् ईÎटनर् Îटेट्स के िलए रेलवे ज़ोन की बात है, वहाँ already दो ज़ोन 
functional हȅ। एक ज़ोन specifically construction activities के िलए focused है और दूसरा 
ज़ोन overall रेलवे के सभी काम पर focused है। इस Ģकार नॉ थर् ईÎट मȂ already दो रेलवे ज़ोन 
functional हȅ। 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
55

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fourth supplementary, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal.  
डा . अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे रेलवे के िवषय मȂ ĢÌन पूछने का अवसर 
िदया, इसके  िलए धन्यवाद। जैसा िक अभी रेलवे के रेवेन्यू और ऑपरेिंटग Ģॉिफट की चचार् हो रही 
है, तो मुझे यह जानकर खुशी है िक रेलवे का रेवेन्यू बढ़ा है और ऑपरेिंटग रेिशयो मȂ भी सुधार 
हुआ है। लेिक
न इसके  बावजूद बहुत ही minimal सरÃलस िदखाई देता है, जो तकरीबन दो हजार 
करोड़ रुपये के आसपास है। 
मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय से जानना चा
हूँगा िक यह जो सरÃलस बढ़ा है, क्या इसका कारण 
senior citizen को दी जाने वाली िरयायतȗ को बंद िकया जाना है, या इसके   पीछे  कोई अन्य 
कारण है?  इसके   साथ  ही, जब  सरÃल स   बढ़ गया है, तो विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को दी जाने वाली 
िरयायतȂ अब तक दोबारा क्यȗ शुरू नहीं की गईं? और क्या इन िरयायतȗ को पुन: Ģारंभ करने के 
िलए कोई समय-सीमा िनधार्िरत की गई है? 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: सभापित महोदय, जो रेवेन्यू सरÃलस आया है, वह बहुत ही मामूली है।  
उसका सबसे बड़ा रीज़
न ऑपरेशन्स मȂ efficiency लाना है।  उसमȂ इलैिक्टर्िफकेशन के कारण 
एनजीर् की कॉÎट कम हुई है, वह बहुत बड़ा कंटर्ीÅयूशन है।  उससे एनजीर् की कॉÎट मȂ साढ़े पांच 
हजार करोड़ रुपये की सेिंवग हुई है।  जो डीज़ल से इलैिक्टर्कल की तरफ िशÄट हुए हȅ और 
उसके  कारण मȂिटनȂस की Ģैिक्टस सुधरी है।  उसके  कारण freight करीब 400 िमिलयन टन के 
आस-पास बढ़ा है।  इसके  साथ ही आज जो पैसȂजसर् को सबिसडी दी जाती है, वह करीब 60 
हजार करोड़ रुपये की है और वह सभ
ी पैसȂजसर् को िमल रही है।  अगर हम compare करȂ, तो जो 
हमारे पड़ोसी देश हȅ, अगर मȅ िवकिसत देशȗ से compare करूंगा, तो उनके  comparison मȂ 
हमारा फेयर बहुत ही कम है।  अभी हाल ही मȂ दावोस वÊडर् इकोनॉिमक फोरम मȂ जाने का मौका 
िमला था।  वहां मȅ दावोस से ज्यूिरख टर्ेन से वापस  आया,  तो  वह  ‘वन्दे भारत’  के  com parison 
की टर्ेन है।  उसमȂ वन्दे भारत जैसी फैिसिलटीज़ हȅ और जो क्वािलटी है, तो यह हो सकता है िक 
वन्दे भारत टर्ेन उससे ऊपर ही हो। कहीं पर भी वह कम नहीं है।  ‘वन्दे भारत’ टर्ेन बहुत अच्छी 
क्वािलटी की बनी है,  उसी के बराबर की टर्ेन है।   
सर, दावोस से ज्यूिरख का िकराया 20 गुना अिधक था।  अगर हम अपने पड़ोसी देशȗ 
पािकÎतान और बांग्लादेश से compare करȂ, तो उससे भी कम िकराया भारत का है, जबिक 
facilities बहुत अच्छी हȅ।  आज याितर्
यȗ के टर्ैवल करने की करीब 100 रुपये कॉÎट आती है,  तो 
उसमȂ मातर् 55 रुपये का िटकट िलया जाता है।  उसमȂ 45 परसȂट की सबिसडी आज भी सभी 
पैसȂजसर् को दी जा रही है।   
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Fifth supplementary, Shri A.A. Rahim. 
SHRI A . A . RAHIM :  Sir, I am asking this questi on for the b
enefit of common 
passengers. The hon. Minister, Ashwini Vaishnawji, stated in the Lok Sabha on 11th 
December 2024 that a fee is deducted from passengers even if their reserved tickets 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
are cancelled automatically after chart preparation . This is causing an unnecessary 
financial burden on passengers .  My specific question is:  How much revenue has 
Indian Railways earned through such deductio ns in the last five years, and is the 
Government ready to revoke them? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Hon. Minister.  
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW :  Hon. Chairman, Sir, in the tr ansportation sector, it is 
crucial to ensure fair distribution of seat s, as it caters to a large number of people, 
especially middle-class and low-income fam ilies. We want to make sure every berth 
and seat is available to as many people as possible, so that ev eryone gets a chance 
to travel at an affordable price, which is what the Indian Railways offers.  That is why it 
is a conscious decision to deduct a certa in amount if someone cancels a confirmed 
ticket. We have seen in the past that some people try to block seats, resell them, and 
cancel them if they do not sell. We want genuine passengers to book tickets and 
benefit from affordable travel. These provis ions are not new; they have been in place 
for 50-60-70 years and are common in every transport sector.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, Question No. 79.    
Performance of PM Gati Shakti 
*79. SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be 
pleased to state: 
(a)  the data on number of Public-P rivate Partnership (PPP) proposals 
received, number of proposals approv ed and the value of investment 
mobilised, year-wise; 
(b)  given that a recent National e-Go vernance Division(NeGD) Report flags 
absence ofstandardised outcome of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), 
whether outcome of KPIs have now been finalised, if so, the KPIs list and 
baselines; 
(c)  the list of social infrastructure projects (schools, hospitals, anganwadis) 
planned andexecuted using Gati Shak ti layers, Ministry-wise and State-
wise; and 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
57

 
 
(d)  whether Government has identified  specific projects that have exceeded 
their original timelines due to land acquisition and forest clearance hurdles, 
if so, the details  thereof? 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY        
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
(a) and (b) The Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects are being 
implemented by different Project Sponsoring  Authorities at Central, State and Local 
Bodies level; data for all those PPP projects is not maintained centrally. 
(c) and  (d)  Central Ministries and State/UTs are using PM GatiShakti 
National Master Plan (PMGS NMP) - a geospa tial digital platform - for planning and 
execution of their respective in frastructure projects, including the social infrastructure 
projects such as schools, hospital, anganwad is etc. However, no centralised record 
of such planning and execution is being maintained. 
Under the PMGS NMP, the initiative of District Master Plan (DMP) focuses on 
planning for the social infrastructure such as Hospital, Schools, Aanganwadi etc. The 
DMP initiative has been made accessible to all the 112 Aspirational Districts. 
  An institutional mechanism, i.e. Pr oject Monitoring Group (PMG), has been 
set up for fast tracking the execution of large-scale infrastructure projects. PMG 
facilitates the monitoring of projects and as sists in the resolution of regulatory issues, 
including land acquisition and forest cl earance-related matters, through inter-
ministerial and inter-state coordination  mechanisms. However, PMG does not 
maintain data specifically attributing project delays due to these factors.  
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Shriman Digvijay Singhji –first supplementary.  Only a few seconds 
left.  
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, the recent National E-Governance Division Report flags 
the absence of standardized outcome-based key performance indicators. Now, when 
the key performance indicators have not been  decided, how are you going to monitor 
your projects under the PM Gati Shakti Yojana? 
SHRI JITIN PRASADA: Through you, Sir, I would like to inform the esteemed Member 
that as for the report he is mentioning…. 
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Question Hour is over.  
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock.
 
The House re-assembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Private Members’ Business. Bills for introduction. 
...(Interruptions)...  
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka) : Sir, since 1952, 2,495 Private Members’ Bills 
have been introduced in the Rajya Sabha.  Out of this, only 340 have been discussed, 
which means only 1 out of every 8 Bills gets discussed. Only 5 Bills have been passed. 
I request you, kindly review the situation because we are going  
through  ...(Interruptions)...  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Nothing is going on record now, please.  Now, Private 
Members’ Business. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   Bills to be introduced.  Fi rst, the Right to Free Cancer 
Treatment Bill, 2024. Shri Sanjay Singh to move for leave to introduce the Bill; not 
present. I cannot help this.  Members give notice to introduce a Bi ll, but they are not 
present. So, you all have to help us.  
Ǜी जावेद अली खान (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, ...( Ëयवधान)... इसको Friday की  
बजाए ...(Ëयवधान)... 
†ﺟﻧﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺩ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ: ﺳﺭ، ۔۔۔)ﻣﺩﺍﺧﻠﺕ(۔۔۔ ﺍﺱ ﮐﻭ ﻓﺭﺍﺋڈے ﮐﯽ ﺑﺟﺎﺋﮯ۔۔۔)ﻣﺩﺍﺧﻠﺕ(۔۔۔  
                                                           
 †Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
59

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: वह Rule भी आप लोग ही change कर  सकते हȅ, Chair नहीं कर सकती।  
Now, the Cybercrime (Prevention and Protect ion) Bill, 2024.  Shri Samirul Islam; not 
present. तो माननीय जयराम जी, please see the gravity.   
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, यह मुझ पर क्यȗ डाल रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Since you have raised the issue, आपने issue raise िकया, तो 
मȅ आपको ही बताऊं  िक माननीय सदÎय Private Members' Bills को लेकर िकतने गÇभीर हȅ!  
Now, the Bharatiya Nyaya San
hita (Amendment) Bill, 2024. Shri Haris Beeran to 
move for leave to introduce the Bill. 
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhit a (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to amend the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the Co nstitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
(amendment of articles 243D and 243T). Shri Haris Beeran to move for leave to 
introduce the Bill.   
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of articles 243D and 243T) 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Constitution of India. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): सर, अगर आप 'yes' भी नहीं सुनȂगे, 'no' भी नहीं सुनȂगे, तो 
क्या िनणर्य करȂगे? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी उपसभापित: इसीिलए मȅने आप सबसे दोबारा अपील की।  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, the Census (Amendment) Bill, 2025 - Shri Haris 
Beeran. 
  
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
The Census (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) :  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Census Act, 1948. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Bill, 
2024 - Shri Prakash Chik Baraik; not presen t.  Next, the Airline Passengers’ Rights 
Bill, 2024 - Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
The Airline Passengers’ Rights Bill, 2024 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharashtra):   Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill to define, extend, and protect the rights of individuals availing air 
carrier services and to prevent their exploitati on in terms of air fares, basic amenities, 
and unjust profits for air se rvice providers and ensure du e compensation in case of 
undue delays, loss or damage  of luggage etc. so as to make air travel more 
affordable, convenient and transparent and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Now, the Employees’ Wellbeing Bill, 2025-             
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
The Employees’ Wellbeing Bill, 2025 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharashtra): Sir, I move for leave to introduce 
a Bill to promote wellbeing of full-time, temp orary, and contractual employees in their 
workplace by limiting working hours, fixing leaves, addressing mental health 
concerns, and ensuring appropriate co mpensation and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
61

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the Regulation of An imal Breeding Bill, 2025 - 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
The Regulation of Animal Breeding Bill, 2025 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharashtra):  Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill to provide for regulation of animal breeders and owners and to prohibit 
the inbreeding and cross-breeding of non-in digenous domestic and pet animals in 
the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, the National Commission for Fishermen (Welfare 
and Support) Bill, 2025- Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha.  
The National Commission for Fishermen (Welfare and Support) Bill, 2025 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh) :  Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for the 
Welfare and Support of Fishermen and for the promotion and development of the 
Fisheries industry, ensuring th e welfare of fishermen and th e fish cultivators, workers 
etc. engaged in the industry and encourag ing exports associated with it, and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
Bill, 2025 (amendment of section 2 and inse rtion of new Chapter VIIB) - Shri Sant 
Balbir Singh.  
The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2025 (amendment of section 2 
and insertion of new Chapter VIIB) 
Ǜी संत बलबीर िंसह (पंजाब): महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूँ िक लोक Ģितिनिधत्व अिधिनयम, 
1951 का और संशोधन करने के िलए िवधेयक को पुर:Îथािपत करने की अनुमित दी जाए। 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Ǜी संत बलबीर िंसह: महोदय, मȅ िवधेयक को पुर:Îथािपत करता हूँ।  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Disaster Management (Ame ndment) Bill, 2025-      
Shri Jose K. Mani; not present.  The Environment (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2025- 
Shri A. A. Rahim. 
The Environment (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2025 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, I move for leave to in troduce a Bill further to amend 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Educational Consultancie s Regulation Bill, 2025 -    
Shri A. A. Rahim. 
The Educational Consultancies Regulation Bill, 2025 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for a 
regulatory regime to oversee and ensure quality and ethical practices of educational 
consultancies in the country and for matt ers connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Right to Disconnect Bill, 2025 – Shri A . A. Rahim. 
The Right to Disconnect Bill, 2025 
SHRI A . A . RAHIM (Kerala) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide 
employees with the right to disconnect from work-related communications outside 
working hours by establishing comprehens ive framework for work-life balance to 
protect the mental health and well-being of employee, and to ensure equitable labour 
practices in the digital age and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Sir, I introduce the Bill.                                 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
63

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Bill, 2025 – Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. 
The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Amendment Bill, 2025 
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar) :  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further 
to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Sche duled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, 1989.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2025 (insertion of new 
article 21B and amendment of article 51 A) - Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy ; not 
present.  The Climate Resilient Agriculture and Farmers Protection Bill, 2025- Shrimati 
Renuka Chowdhury; not present .  The Right to Fair Compen sation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation an d Resettlement (Amend ment) Bill, 2025 - 
Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury; not present .  The Small Claims Court Bill, 2025, Shri 
Sanjay Seth. 
The Small Claims Court Bill, 2025 
SHRI SANJAY SETH (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
provide for the establishment of Small Clai ms Courts across India to ensure speedy, 
cost-effective, and simplified resolution of minor civil disputes, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SANJAY SETH: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The Persons with Rare and Life-Threatening Diseases 
(Financial Support and Medical Entitlement) Bill , 2025, Shri Sanjay Seth.   
The Persons with Rare and Life -Threatening Diseases                                  
(Financial Support and Medica l Entitlement) Bill, 2025 
SHRI SANJAY SETH (Uttar Pradesh) :  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
provide for the identification, free medi cal treatment, and financial assistance and 
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
support to persons suffering from rare  and life-threatening diseases, for the 
establishment of a statutory Treatment of  Rare and Life-threatening Diseases Fund 
and to provide for its governance structure,  and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SANJAY SETH:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) 
Amendment Bill, 2025, Shri Sanjay Seth. 
The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025 
SHRI SANJAY SETH (Uttar Pradesh) :  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SANJAY SETH:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, the Kisan Jeevan Suraksha Evam Durghatna 
Pratipurti Vidheyak, 2025, Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu. 
The Kisan Jeevan Suraksha Evam Durghatna Pratipurti Vidheyak, 2025 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू (नामिनदȃिशत): महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं िक कृिष कायर्कलापȗ के 
दौरान िकसानȗ और कृिष Ǜिमकȗ का अिनवायर् रूप से बीमा करने, मृत्यु या िदËयांगता के िलए 
Ģितपूिर्त और िडिजटल उपकरणȗ, सुरक्षा Ģोत्साहनȗ और सावर्जिनक-िनजी भागीदारी का लाभ 
उठाने तथा उससे संबंिधत या उसके  आनुषंिगक िवषयȗ का उपबंध करने के िलए िवधेयक को 
पुर:Îथािपत करने की अनुमित दी जाए। 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SATN
AM SINGH SANDHU:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The Pravasi Bharatiya Kaus hal Evam Pratibha Prerak 
Vidheyak, 2025, Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu. 
  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
65

 
 
The Pravasi Bharatiya Kaushal Evam Pratibha Prerak Vidheyak, 2025 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू (नामिनदȃिशत): महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं िक राÍटर् िवकास के िलए 
Ģवासी भारतीयȗ के कौशल, Ģितभा और संसाधनȗ के संघटन, ज्ञान के आदान-Ģदान, िनवेश और 
नवाचार को बढ़ावा देने के िलए एक सांिविधक Ģािधकरण की Îथापना और तत्संसƪ अथवा 
उसके  आनुषंिगक िवषयȗ का उपबंध करने के िलए िवधेयक को पुर:Îथािपत करने की अनुमित  
दी जाए। 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SATN
AM SINGH SANDHU:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The National Ranking and Accreditation Authority for 
Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2025, Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu. 
The National Ranking and Accreditation Authority for                                            
Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2025 
SHRI SATNAM SINGH SANDHU (Nominated) :  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a 
Bill to provide for the establishment of  a statutory authority for ranking and 
accreditation of higher educational institutio ns in the country, ensuring transparency, 
excellence, and alignment with national and global standards, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SATNAM SINGH SANDHU:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The National Commission for Women (Amendment) Bill, 
2025, Ms. Swati Maliwal. 
The National Commission for Women (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL  (National Capital Territory of Delhi) : Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill further to amend the National Commission for Women Act, 1990, to 
strengthen the resources and autonomy of  the National Commission for Women so 
that it functions as powerful women’s rights body and works effectively... 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No discussion on the Bill, please.  
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL:  Sir, you just allowed my colleague.  Let me introduce, Sir.   
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no.  They read the Bill title only.   
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL:  Sir, my colleague just introduced.  Let me at least introduce. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They have introduced only.  Are you reading the title or 
speaking on the Bill?  
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL:  Sir, I am not speaking on the Bill.  I am just explaining what it 
will do.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Then, read the title.   
Sir, you allowed Madam Priyanka.  She also introduced the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, you introduce the Bill.   
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL :  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the 
National Commission for Women Act, 1990. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Food Safety and Standa rds (Amendment) Bill, 2026.  
Ms. Swati Maliwal. 
The Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2026 
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL (National Capital Territory of Delhi): Sir, with your permission, 
I rise to seek leave to introduce a Bill furt her to amend the Food Safety and Standards 
Act, 2006 to provide for mandatory front-of-pack  nutrition labelling, stricter regulation 
for misleading food advertisements, action on celebrities prom oting these harmful 
products and enhanced penalties for violations. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please introduce the Bill.  
MS. SWATI MALIWAL:  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
67

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The Commission for Air Qua lity Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Bill, 2026. Ms. Swati Maliwal. 
The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Bill, 2026 
MS.  SWATI MALIWAL (National Capital Territory of Delhi): Sir, with your permission, 
I rise to seek leave to introduce a Bill to amend th e Commission for Air Quality 
Management in National Capital Region an d Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 to strengthen 
the autonomy, enforcement powers, resour ces and functioning of the Commission, 
so that it can work effectively across States to reduce air pollution. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please introduce the Bill. 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL:  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to amend the 
Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining 
Areas Act, 2021. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Bill, 2026.   
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham.  Not present. The Kolhapuri Leather Craft (Preservation 
and Livelihood Security) Bill, 2026. Shri Dh ananjay Bhimrao Mahadik. Not present.  
The Online Matrimonial and Dating Services (Promotion and Regulation) Bill, 2026.   
Dr. Fauzia Khan. 
The Online Matrimonial and Dating Services (Promotion and Regulation) Bill, 2026 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide 
for the prohibition of casual online dati ng services that promote transient and 
superficial relationships, while promoting and regulating serious matrimonial services 
aligned with cultural and familial ethos of the country; to protect users, particularly 
women and youth, from exploitation, harassment and social harms; to preserve family 
structures and national social fabric, and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Medical Gases (Quality, Sa fety and Regulation) Bill, 
2026.   Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade.   
The Medical Gases (Quality, Safety and Regulation) Bill, 2026 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE (Maharashtra) :  Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill to provide for the establis hment of a National Authority and State 
Authorities for regulating quality standards, licensing, inspection, current good 
manufacturing practices compliance, and sa fe manufacture, storage, distribution, 
and use of medical gases, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Delivery Platfo rms (Verification of Antecedents of 
Delivery Personnel) Bi ll, 2026 -- Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade. 
The Delivery Platforms (Verification of Ant ecedents of Delivery Personnel) Bill, 2026 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GO PCHADE (Maharashtra) : Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill to provide for mandatory veri fication of antecedents  of every delivery 
personnel employed by delive ry platforms or other employers to ensure safety of 
consumers, maintenance of a mandatory register of de livery personnel, and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE : Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Artificial Intelligence (Human Health and Medical 
Education) Regulation  Bill, 2026 -- Dr. Ajeet  Madhavrao Gopchade. 
The Artificial Intelligence (Hum an Health and Medica l Education)                
Regulation Bill, 2026 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPC HADE (Maharashtra) : Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill to provide for a compre hensive, scientific and patient-centric 
statutory framework for the ethical, safe and disciplined use of Artificial Intelligence 
in human health, clinical research and medical education; to enable Government 
and private hospitals, research institutions  and medical colleges to utilise Artificial 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
69

 
 
Intelligence to enhance patient care, pres cription safety, clinical trials, drug 
discovery and medical education under stri ct human oversight; to ensure patient 
safety, data protection, accountability an d transparency; to establish a statutory 
regulatory authority for the purpose an d for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE : Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Constitution (Amendment) Bill,  2026 (amendment 
of articles 15, 16, 124, 21 7, 224 and Seventh Schedule and substitution of article 
130) – Shri P . Wilson. 
The Constitution (Ame ndment) Bill, 2026 ( amendment of articles 15, 16, 124, 217, 
224 and seventh schedule and su bstitution of article 130 ) 
SHRI P . WILSON (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Constitution of India. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Virtual Court Proceedings Bill, 2026 – Shri P. 
Wilson.  
The Virtual Court Pr oceedings Bill, 2026 
SHRI P . WILSON (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide 
for proceedings of all Cour ts, Tribunals and Commissions to be held virtually in 
order to facilitate efficient and timely judi cial proceedings, mitigate delays, reduce 
costs and increase convenience for all pa rties involved and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI P. WILSON:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Temple Autonomy, Governance and Cultural 
Heritage Management Bill, 2026 – Shri Sujeet Kumar.  
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
The Temple Autonomy, Governance and Cu ltural Heritage Ma nagement Bill, 2026 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha) : Sir, move for leave to introduce a Bill to give 
effect to the constitutional guarantee of religious autonomy under articles 25 and 26 
of the Constitution of India by provid ing a national framework for autonomous, 
transparent, community-led and professionally governed management of Hindu 
temples and religious endowments; to ensure  protection of India’s temple heritage, 
rituals and traditions; to secure financial integrity and optimal utilization of temple 
assets for religious and community welf are purposes; and fo r matters connected 
therewith or inci dental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR : Sir, I introduce the Bill.   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Advanced Medical Response Infrastructure and 
Training Bill, 2026 -- Shri Sujeet Kumar to move for leave to introduce the Bill.   
The Advanced Medical Response Infrastructure and Training Bill, 2026 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha) : Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
recognize emergency survival during th e Golden Hour as a public health 
right intrinsically linked to the right to life; to establish a decentralized 
national emergency survival ecosystem through mandatory public access 
defibrillation, universal life-support education, digital integration of 
emergency response assets, legal pr otection for citizen responders, and 
coordinated institutional responsibilit y across public and private sectors; 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Domestic Workers (Social Security and Welfare) Bill, 
2026 -- Shri A. D. Singh to move for leave to introduce the Bill. 
The Domestic Workers (Social Security and Welfare) Bill, 2026 
SHRI A. D. SINGH (Bihar) :  Sir, I move for leave to intr oduce a Bill to provide for the 
social security, welfare, regulation of employment conditions, dignity of labour, and 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
71

 
 
protection of the rights of domestic work ers; and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.   
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI A. D. SINGH:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Shakti Samman (Pay Parity for Women) Bill, 2026 -- 
Shri Kartikeya Sharma to move for leave to introduce the Bill. 
The Shakti Samman (Pay Parity for Women) Bill, 2026 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA (Haryana) :  Sir, I move for leav e to introduce a Bill to 
enforce the fundamental right of wome n to equal pay for work of equal 
value; to prescribe objective standa rds for job evaluation to eliminate 
gender bias in remuneration; to establish the National Authority for Pay 
Parity of Women with distinct inve stigative and adjudicatory powers; to 
prohibit systemic wage discriminati on and non-transparent pay practices; 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The Critical Infrastructure (Resilience, Protection and 
Accountability) Bill, 2026 -- Shri Kartikeya Shar ma to move for leave to introduce the 
Bill. 
The Critical Infrastructure (Resilience, Protection and Accountability) Bill, 2026 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA (Haryana) :  Sir, I move for leav e to introduce a Bill to 
provide for the identification, design ation, and protection of critical 
infrastructure of strategic importance; to establish a framework for its 
resilience through technological integration; to impose strict liability and 
accountability on parties responsible for fa ilure of, or loss of lives due to 
defects in the critical infrastructure; and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  So, introduction is over.   Now, Bills for withdrawal. The 
Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2024 .  Dr . Bhim Singh to move for 
leave to withdraw the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2024.   
The Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2024 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार): महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं िक देश मȂ शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ के िविनयमन और 
िवकास को सुिनिÌचत करने के िलए शहरी क्षेतर् (िवकास और िविनयमन) सिमित की Îथापना 
और तत्संसƪ या उसके  आनुषंिगक िवषयȗ का उपबंध करने वाले िवधेयक को वा पस लेने की 
अनुमित दी जाए। 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
डा. भीम िंसह: महोदय, मȅ िवधेयक को वापस लेता हूँ।  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, the second Bill for wi thdrawal.  The Recognition of 
Legal Person Status of Rivers Bill, 2024 -- Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu to move for 
leave to withdraw the Recognition of Lega l Person Status of Rivers Bill, 2024; not 
present.   
 Now, Private Members’ Bills for consideration and passing.  
Hon. Members, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Further consideration of the 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2024, moved by      
Dr. Fauzia Khan on 7th February, 2025.  On 5 th December, 2025, Sushri Swati Maliwal 
had not concluded her speech while participat ing in the discussion.  I now call upon 
Sushri Swati Malwal to continue her speech. Sushri Swati Maliwal. 
$The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2024  
सुǛी Îवाित मािलवाल (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): सर, आज मȅ इस सदन मȂ िकसी 
राजनैितक मुǈे पर नहीं, बिÊक देश की आधी आबादी, हमारी मिहलाओं और बिच्चयȗ की िंजदगी 
के सवाल पर बोलने के िलए खड़ी हुई हूँ। मिहलाओं और बिच्चयȗ की सुरक्षा कोई लग्ज़री नहीं है। 
यह आज के भारत की सबसे बुिनयादी जरूरत है। मȅ साफ कहना चाहती हूँ, मिहलाओं और 
बिच्चयȗ के िखलाफ अपराध पर हमारा आकर्ोश इस बात पर िनभर्र नहीं होना चा
िहए िक िकस 
राज्य मȂ िक सकी सरकार है। अगर देश के िकसी भी कोने मȂ िकसी भी बेटी के साथ कुछ गलत 
होता है, तो वह िसफर्  उस राज्य की नहीं, बिÊक पूरे देश की बेटी है। आज एक लड़की जब Îकूल  
या कॉलेज जाती है, तो उसके  माता-िपता िदन मȂ कई बार फोन करते हȅ िक बेटा, पहुँची या नहीं, 
                                                           
$ Further consideration continued on a motion moved on the 7th February, 2025.  
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
73

 
 
लोकेशन भेजो, ठीक तो हो। यह डर िकसी भी माँ-बाप के मन मȂ नहीं होना चािहए। हमȂ ऐसा भारत 
बनाना है, जहाँ बेटी को आजादी िमले, िनगरानी नहीं।  
 सर, एनसीआरबी के अनुसार भारत मȂ हर िदन 90 से ज्यादा रेप के मामले दजर् होते हȅ। 
साल 2023 मȂ 1,77,000 से ज्यादा कर्ाइÇस अगȂÎट िचÊडर्ेन के केसेज़ िरपोटर् हुए। सर, ये िसफर्  
ÎटैिटिÎटक्स नहीं हȅ, ये हमारी बिच्चयȗ और मिहलाओं की चीखȂ हȅ। यह िसफर्  दजर् मामलȗ की बात 
है। सर, हम सब जानते हȅ िक असल संख्या इससे कहीं ज्यादा है।   सर, एक कड़वी सच्चाई यह 
भी है िक एक बार िकस
ी लड़की के साथ कुछ लोग शोषण करते हȅ और उसके  बाद ज्यादातर 
मामलȗ मȂ पूरा िसÎटम िमल कर उसके  साथ शोषण करता है। 2018 मȂ िदÊली मȂ एक आठ महीने 
की बच्ची के साथ बलात्क
ार हुआ था। आज 2026 है, अभी कुछ िदन पहले मȅ उस लड़की से िमली। 
अब वह आठ साल की हो गई है, लेिकन उसको अभी तक न्याय नहीं िमल ा। सर, सोिचए, िजस 
घटना को वह याद भी नहीं कर सकती, उसी के िलए उसे सालȗ तक कोटș के चक्कर काटने 
पड़Ȃगे। बार-बार गवाही होगी, बार-बार टर्ॉमा होगा। सर, आज देश मȂ 3 लाख से ज्यादा पॉक्सो 
केसेज़ कोट्सर् मȂ पȂिंडग हȅ। फाÎट टर्ैक कोट्सर् आज भी हर िजले मȂ नहीं हȅ और जहाँ हȅ, वहाँ भी 
फÎट टर्ैक न्याय नहीं हो रहा है। सर, यह आठ महीने की बच्ची का केस भी तो फाÎट टर्ैक कोटर् मȂ 
ही चल रहा है। पुिलस जाँच मȂ कमज
ोरी, फोरȂिसक लैÅस मȂ सȅपल का सालȗ-साल पड़े-पड़े सड़ 
जाना, पीिड़त बिच्चयȗ के िलए सपोटर् िसÎटम िसफर्  कागजȗ पर होना, यही वजह है िक आज 
िसफर्  14.3 परसȂट पॉक्सो मामलȗ मȂ किन्वक्शन हो पा रहा है। सर, तार ीख पर तारीख लड़की की 
कमर तोड़ देती है और वह िसÎटम के सामने हार मानने पर मजबूर हो जाती है। सर, यह िकसी 
एक लड़की की हार नहीं होती, यह पूरे देश की हार होती है। इतना सख्त कानून और इतना 
कमजोर न्याय, यह देश कैसे Îवीकार कर सकता है! सर, 201
8 मȂ जब उस आठ महीने की बच्ची 
के साथ गलत हुआ था, मȅ आमरण अनशन पर बैठी थी। मेरे अनशन के दसवȂ िदन पर छोटी 
बिच्चयȗ के साथ जो रेप करते हȅ, उनको फाँसी की सजा हो, ऐसा अध्यादेश सरकार ने पािरत 
िकया था। लेिकन सर, मȅ आज यह सवाल पूछना चाहती हूँ िक िकतने लोगȗ को फाँसी की सजा 
हुई? सच यह है िक इस देश मȂ अपरािधयȗ को डर नहीं लगता। उन्हȂ लगता है िक पैसे और रसूख 
के बल पर वे कभी भी बेल पर या पैरोल पर बाहर आ जाएँगे। सर, अगर सजा का डर ही नहीं 
होगा, तो अ
पराध कैसे रुकȂगे ? Until there is certaint y an d swiftness of punishment, 
nothing can change in this country.  
 सर, सिदयȗ से जीबी रोड हमारी संसद से िसफर्  तीन िकलोमीटर की दूरी पर एिग्जÎट 
कर रही है। यहाँ 90 ĤॉथेÊस हȅ और हर िदन यहाँ जो पाँच हजार मिहलाएँ हȅ, उनके  साथ कई बार 
शोषण होता है। कई बार हमने यहाँ से अंडर-एज लड़िकयाँ रेÎक्यू की हȅ। सर, एक लड़की, जो 15 
साल की थी, जब मȅ उसको यहाँ रेÎक्
यू करने गई, तो उसको तहखानȗ मȂ छुपा रखा था। हमȂ उस 
बच्ची को उन तहखानȗ से बाहर िनकालने मȂ 4 से 5 घंटे लग गए।                                            
सर, वह देखने मȂ 32 से 33 साल की लग रही थी,  परन्तु जब हमने उस
का bone age 
test कराया, तो वह 14 साल की िनकली।  उसने हमȂ बताया िक वह जीबी रोड पर 9 साल की उĦ 
मȂ बेची गई थी और हर िदन उसे Oxytocin के injections लगते थे, िजससे िक उसके  body  
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
parts बड़े िदखȂ और हर िदन कई लोग उसके  साथ शोषण करते थे।  जब तक हम उस तक पहुंचे, 
तब तक she was suffering from several diseases. हमने उसको िदÊली सरकार के shelter 
home मȂ रखवाया, लेिकन वह वहां से भी कुछ िदनȗ के बाद गायब हो गई।  हाई कोटर् तक यह 
matter गया।  हाई कोटर् ने भी अपनी पूरी जान लग
ाई िक लड़की को वापस ढूँढ़  के ला सके , 
लेिकन वह लड़की नहीं िमली।  आज भी मुझे नहीं पता िक वह लड़की कहां है, िकस हालात मȂ है 
और िंजदा है या नहीं है।  आज देश मȂ यह हाल है।   
सर, अब तो गली -गली मȂ जीबी रोड्स खुल गए हȅ।  ज्
यादातर spas are fronts for 
prostitution rackets और ऐसे गलत spas धड़Êले से पूरे देश मȂ खुले हुए हȅ।  मȅने कई spas मȂ 
raid की है।   जब मȅ एक spa के अंदर घुसी, तो मȅने देखा िक वहां पर एक लड़की, जो िक 16 
साल की थी और िदÊली की ÎटूडȂट थी, वह एक कमरे मȂ थी।  वहां पर दो आदमी थे और उसके  
साथ शोषण हो रहा था।  हम उसको वहां से resc
ue करके  लेकर आए।  उसमȂ काफी सारी FIRs 
भी हुई हȅ, काफी जांच भी हो रही है, but Sir, State Governments have to act on this issue. 
Spas have to be regulated in this co untry and cross-gender massage has to be 
banned across. Otherwise, कानून िसफर्  पेपर पर रह जाएंगे।  
सर, मȅने 9 साल तक िदÊली मिहला आयोग मȂ का म िकया है।  मȅने 8 महीने की बच्ची से 
लेकर, 90 साल  की दादी तक के यौन शोषण के मामले देखे हȅ, उनको handle िकया है।  इसमȂ 
एक बात िबÊकुल  साफ़ है िक rape कपड़ȗ से नहीं होता, rape मानिसकता से होता है, कपड़े 
बहाने हȅ, समÎया सोच है।  सर, हम सबके  घर मȂ मां है, बहन है, पत्नी है और बेटी है।  अगर आज 
हम िकसी और की बेटी के साथ अन्याय देख कर चुप रह जाएं, तो कल बारी हमारे घरȗ की भी हो 
सकती है।   
सर, 'मिहला सुरक्षा'  िसफर्  पुिलस या सरकार का काम नहीं है, बिÊक यह पूरे समाज की 
सामूिहक िजÇमेदारी है, इसिलए कानून जरूरी है, लेिकन उससे भी ज्यादा जरूरी है - उसका 
सख्त और honest तरी
के  से implementation. Number one, पुिलस के संसाधन बढ़ाए जाने 
चािहए और जवाबदेही तय की जानी चािहए। दूसरा, हर िजले मȂ fast track courts होने ही 
चािहए and they should work in a fast-track manner. तीसरा, हर िजले मȂ आधुिनक 
forensic science laboratory होनी चािहए।  आज इन laboratories का हाल बहुत बुरा है और 
इन laborat
ories मȂ samples सालȗ-साल सड़ते रह जाते हȅ, 20-20 thousands की pendency 
होती है। अगर forensic samples टाइम पर िमलने लग जाएं, तो courts मȂ सब कुछ fast track 
तरीके  से होने के chances हȅ।  W e  h a v e  t o  f o c u s  o n  this. Fourth, Child Welfare 
Committees को संसाधन िमलने चािहए। आज Child Welfare Committees िसफर्  कागज पर हȅ 
और कुछ -कुछ districts मȂ तो exist भी नहीं कर रही हȅ। न तो उनके  पास कोई staff है और न ही 
उनके  पास कोई संसाधन है। We need to work on that.  
सर, public prosecutors की संख्या और जव
ाबदेही, दोनȗ तय होनी चािहए।  हमने 
िदÊली मिहला आयोग मȂ Rape Crisis Cell के under हर public prosecutor के साथ हमने staff 
िदया था और उसके  चलते हमने लाखȗ लड़िकयȗ को victim compensation िदलवाया, क्यȗिक 
public prosecutor, एक अकेला इंसान, िक
तने cases handle करेगा? They also need 
[ 06 February, 2026 ]
75

 
 
support, they also need our entire system to  stand behind them so that they can fight 
for the cause of that girl.  
सर, जो लोग गवाही देते हȅ, उनकी सुरक्षा भी सुिनिÌचत होनी चािहए। Rape survivors 
के िलए rehabilitation law होनी चािहए, so that their social, psychological, educational, 
skilling, livelihood needs are met.  पुिलस Îटेशन से लेकर public spaces तक CCTV की 
coverage बढ़ानी चािहए।  सबसे ज्यादा जरूरी, िकसी भी नेता या अिधकारी मȂ से अगर कोई 
लापरवाही करे, तो उस पर सख्त से सख्त कायर्वाही होनी च ािहए।   
सर, मȅ 'िनभर्या' की मां से िमली थी और मȅ उनके  संघषर् को सलाम करती हूं।   उन्हȗने मुझे 
एक बात बोली थी, जो कभी  -  कभी मुझे सोने नहीं देती। उन्हȗने मुझे यह बो ला था िक कभी-कभी 
उन्हȂ लगता है िक अगर उनकी बेटी जीिवत होती, तो हमारे देश मȂ न्याय पाने की यह जो िजÊलत 
है, इसको वह कैसे सह पाती? क्यȗिक सर,  िनभर्या तक से यह पूछा गया था िक तुम बस मȂ क्यȗ 
गई, ऑटो मȂ क्यȗ नहीं गई, तुम रात मȂ क्यȗ गई, तुम िदन मȂ क्यȗ नहीं गई, वह लड़का कौन था, 
क्या तुÇहारा बॉयģȂड  था? सर, ये सा
रे सवाल हमारे देश मȂ लड़िकयȗ से ही पूछे जाते हȅ? सर, 
मुझे वह िदन देखना है, जब भारत मȂ कोई िनभर्या नहीं हो और मुझे वह िद
न देखना है, जब भारत 
की हर बेटी िबना डर के आधी रात मȂ घर लौट सके  और उसके  मां-बाप चैन की िंजदगी जी सकȂ।   
Thank you, so much, Sir.                                                    
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, w
e are discussing very serious, very sensitive and very 
important issues.  However, there is a re quest from various Members of the House 
that they be allowed to go back to their St ates and Constituencies early today.  So, I 
request that you take the sense of the House and have the House adjourned now 
instead of at 4.30 p.m. 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय संसदीय कायर् मंतर्ी। 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ; AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU) :  Sir, a request has come to me.  I agree with the 
proposal of Jairam ji and you take the sense of the Ho use.  I hope the House agrees 
with that. 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस। 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): ठीक है, सर।  
Ǜी उपसभा
पित: माननीय सदÎयगण, आपकी सहमित से, the House stands adjourned to 
meet at 11 a.m. on Monday, the 9th February, 2026. 
The House then adjourned at forty-six minutes past two of the clock till  
eleven of the clock on Monday, the 9th February, 2026. 
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 