Vol. 270       Monday, 
No. 9 9 February, 2026 
               20 Magha, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Felicitations by the Chair–  
Congratulation to the Indian Under-19  Cricket Team for winning the ICC 
Under-19 Men's Cricket World Cup (page 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1-7) 
Matters raised with Permission–  
Need for safeguarding heritage sites fr om natural hazards and climate-related 
risks (pages 8-11) 
Concern over the new Draft Labour Rules and the National Labour and 
Employment Policy and their impact under Labour Codes (pages 11-12) 
Concern over hardship arising from time limit on filing TDS correction statements 
(pages 12-13) 
Demand to ensure permanent offices fo r MLAs and MPs by the Government in 
the constituency (pages 13-15) 
Need for Government intervention to addr ess the agricultural and public health 
crisis caused by arsenic contamination of gr oundwater in Haryana 
(pages 15-16) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Concern o
ver mining approval in Tadoba  Tiger Corridor despite opposition by 
Wildlife Board Committee (pages 16-17) 
Demand for inclusion of Meetei Mayek script alongside Bengali script for 
the Manipuri optional question paper in UPSC Examinations (pages 17-18) 
Demand for development of Marang Buru, Mudma and Rohtasgarh as 
a Special Cultural Corridor (pages 18-19) 
Need for conservation and promotion of the Ka thiawari horse breed 
(pages 19-20) 
Demand for railway underpass at Binnab ari Gram Panchayat in Darjeeling 
(pages 20-21) 
Concern over the plight of marginalised  patients in accessing efficient and 
effective healthcare at AIIMS, Delhi (pages 21-22) 
Need for establishment of a semiconductor hub and integrated Industrial Park in 
Bihar (pages 22-23) 
Concern over severe drought crisis in Latur, Marathwada and Vidarbha regions 
of Maharashtra (pages 24-25) 
Need to operationalize a permanent Indian Space Force to safeguard national 
security and strategic interests (pages 25-26) 
Demand for restoration of full functionality of AIIMS Raebareli, Uttar Pradesh and 
addressing acute shortage of staff, bed capacity and residential facilities 
(pages 26-27) 
Concern over District Administration's obstruction in installation of statues of 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and Jagatpati Basaveshwar in Bagalkot         
(pages 27-28) 
Need for revision of Below Poverty Line (BPL) criteria and updating of the BPL 
List (pages 28-29)  
Website :   http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
             https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:  rsedit-e@rss.sansad.in

Demand f
or holistic infrastructural development package for Southern 
Odisha (pages 29-30) 
Demand for exemption from mandatory TET for in-service teachers appointed 
prior to the RTE Act, 2009 and pr ospective application of TET 
norms (pages 30-32) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 32-63)  
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Qu estions (Both in English and Hindi) 
are available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Ra jya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials]  
The Union Budget, 2026-27–  Discussion not concluded (pages 64-133) 
Special Mentions– 
D e m a n d    f o r    r e s u m p t i o n    o f    A i r   I n d i a   s e r v i c e s   f r o m   S i l c h a r    A i r p o r t  
(pages 133-134)
 
Concern over influence of online gaming (pages 134-135) 
Need for a central law to ensure accountability of public servants (page 135) 
Demand for direct air connectivity between  Porbandar to Mumbai and Delhi 
(page 136) 
Concern over rising Cyber Fraud and Fake Call Scams (pages 136-137) 
Need to ensure social security to workers in  the unorganised sector 
(pages 137-138) 
Need for environmental and forest clearances for the Attappady Irrigation project 
in Kerala (pages 138-139) 
Need  to  uphold  brotherhood,  unity  and  social  harmony  in the society 
(pages 139) 
Concern over impact of air pollution on education (pages 139-140) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 9th February, 2026 / 20 Magha, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock,  
MR.CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
FELICITATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
Congratulation to the Indian Under-19 Cricket Team for winning the ICC Under-19 
Men's Cricket World Cup 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, it is with immense pride that I refer to the 
outstanding achievement of the Indian Under-19 Cricket Team in winning the ICC 
Under-19 Men's Cricket World Cup at Hara re, Zimbabwe, defeating England team by 
a commanding margin and bringing great honour to the nation. This remarkable 
effort, which is a record extending Sixth Under-19 World Cup title, once again 
highlights the depth of talent, commitment and sporting excellence among our youth. 
Hon. Members, I always applaud team work and while this success belongs to 
the entire team, I would also like to place on record, special appreciation for the 
young prodigy, Vaibhav Suryawanshi, who scored extraordinary 175 runs, the highest 
ever in the Under-19 Cricket World Cup Finals.  Brilliant individual performances by his 
colleagues in the run-up to the Final were truly inspiring and reflect the promise of a 
bright future. On my own behalf and on be half of this House, I extend heartiest 
congratulations to the captain, players, coaches and the entire support staff, and 
wish these young champions many more laurels in the years to come.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be laid on the Table.      
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
I. Report and Account (2
024-25) of ISI, Kolkata and related papers.
II. Notifications of the Ministry of Power
III. Report and Account (2024-25) of  PSDF ( Erstwhile POSOCO), New Delhi and
and related papers.
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF POWER; AND THE MINISTER OF 
STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF NEW AN D RENEWABLE ENERGY (SHRI SHRIPAD 
YESSO NAIK): Sir, on behalf of Rao Inderjit Singh, I lay on the Table:– 

I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:-
(a) Ninety-third 
Annual Report  of the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), Kolkata,
West Bengal, for the year 2024-25.
(b) Ninety-thirdAnnual Accounts of the Indian  Statistical Institute (ISI), Kolkata,
West Bengal, for the year 2024-25, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Statement by Government accepting the above Report.
(d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a)
and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6172/18/26] 
I I . ( i )    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the
Ministry of Power, issued under clause (a) of Section 14 of the Energy Conservation
Act, 2001:–
(1) S.O. 5665(E)., dated the 8 th December, 2025, specifying the energy
consumption standards for co
untertop induction hobs and directing to
display the particulars on a label in the manner as mentioned therein.
(2) S.O. 5967(E)., dated the 23 rd December, 2025, amending the Principal
Notification No. S.O. 185(E), dated the 12th January, 2009.
(3) S.O. 5968(E)., dated the 23 rd December, 2025, amending the Principal
Notification No. S.O. 4088(E), dated the 18th September, 2023.
(4) S.O. 5970(E)., dated the 23 rd December, 2025, amending the Principal
Notification No. S.O. 2902(E), dated the 7th September, 2016.
(5) No. 5506/BEE/S&L/AL/2025-26., dated the 29 th December, 2025,
publishing the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (Appliance Labeling and
Compliance) Regulations, 2026.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (5), see No. L.T. 6193/18/26] 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Power, issued under clau se (b) and clause (d) of Section 14 of the Energy 
Conservation Act, 2001:– 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
(1) 
 
S.O. 5969(E)., dated the 23rd December, 2025, specifying Chillers of various 
vapour compression types and directing to display the particulars on labels in 
the manner as specified therein. 
(2) S.O. 6044(E)., dated the 29 th December, 2025, specifying the induction hob 
rated for voltages not exceeding 250 Volts alternating current, 50 Hz for single 
phase as provided under Indian Stan dards IS 19014 for induction hob and 
directing to display the particulars on labels in the manner as specified 
therein. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) and (2), see No. L.T. 6193/18/26] 
    (iii)    A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Power Notification No. 
G.S.R. 926(E)., dated the 29th December, 2025, rescinding two Notifications bearing 
Nos. G.S.R. 549(E), dated the 26 th May, 2016 and G.S.R. 311(E), dated the 31 st 
March, 2017, issued under clause (v) of su b-section (2) of Section 56; clauses (l), 
(m) and (n) of sub-Section (2) of Sect ion 13 and Section 46 of the Energy 
Conservation Act, 2001. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6191/18/26] 
   (iv)    A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Power Notification No. 
5506/BEE/S&L/AL/2025-26., dated the 29 th December, 2025, publishing the 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (Appliance Labeling and Compliance) Regulations, 2026, 
under Section 59 of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6192/18/26] 
  (v)   A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Power Notification No. 
13/2/7/2015-PM/CERC., dated the 19 th December, 2025, publishing the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (Cross Border Trade of Electricity) (Second 
Amendment) Regulations, 2025, under Section 179 of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6373/18/26] 
III.          A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:– 
(a) Annual Report and Audited Accounts of  the Power System Development 
Fund (PSDF) (Erstwhile POSOCO), New Delhi, for the year 2024-25. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
3

(b) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6374/18/26] 
Report and Account (2024-25) of NSIC, New Delhi and related papers. 
सूÑम, लघु और मध्यम उǏम मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य 
मंतर्ी (सुǛी शोभा करांदलाजे): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखती हूं:- 
      (1)     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-
section 1 (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act. 2013::– 
(a) Seventieth Annual Report and Accounts of the National Small Industries 
Corporation Limited (NSIC), New Delh i, for the year 2024-25, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
     (2)   Statement (in English and Hindi)  giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6194/18/26] 
I.       Notifications of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
II. Reports and Accounts (2024-25) of NMRC, Noida ; CMRL, Chennai ; GMRC 
Limited, Gandhinagar, Gujarat; NIUA, New Delhi and related papers. 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI RAJ BHUSHAN 
CHOUDHARY): Sir, on behalf of Shri Tokhan Sahu, I lay on the Table:– 
I .    ( i )     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, issued under Section 3 of the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971:– 
(1) S.O. 5608(E)., dated the 5 th December, 2025, appointing Shri Avinash 
Jain, Group General manager (Operati ons and Maintenance) as Estate 
Officer of NCRTC for Namo Bharat corridors/section, both under operation 
as well as construction. 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(2) S.O. 179(E)., dated the 13 th January, 2026, appointing Shri Shiv Om 
Dwivedi, General Manager/Business De velopment and Shri P.K. Sharma, 
Chief Engineer/Track as Estate Officers of DMRC fo r Premises of the Delhi 
Metro Rail Corporation, both in NCT of Delhi and the NCR area. 
[Placed in Library. .  For (1) and (2), see No. L.T. 6387/18/26] 
    (ii)   A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
Notification No. S.O. 180(E)., dated the 13 th January, 2026, amending the Principal 
Notifications No. S.O. 3706(E), dated the 14 th October, 2019 and S.O. 2819(E), 
dated the 19 th August, 2020, under sub-section (2) of Section 32 of the Metro 
Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6195/18/26] 
II.     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:– 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the No ida Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
(NMRC), Noida, Uttar Pradesh, for th e year 2024-25, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6386/18/26] 
(ii) (a) Eighteenth Annual Report and Accounts of the Chennai Metro Rail 
Limited (CMRL), Chennai, Tamil Nadu , for the year 2024-25, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6198/18/26] 
(iii) (a) Fifteenth Annual Report and Accounts of the Gu jarat Metro Rail 
Corporation(GMRC) Limited, Gandhina gar, Gujarat, for the year 2024-
25, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
5

 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6385/18/26] 
   (2) Statements (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
  (iv)    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:– 
(a) Annual Report and Audited Accounts of the National Institute of Urban 
Affairs (NIUA), New Delhi, for the year 2024-25. 
(b) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6197/18/26] 
Reports and Account (2023-24) of  NPCC, New Delhi; BRB, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh  
and related papers.  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI RAJ BHUSHAN 
CHOUDHARY): Sir, I lay on the Table:– 
I.  (i)   (1)   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:– 
(a) Sixty-seventh Annual Report and Accounts of the National Projects 
Construction Corporation Limited (NPCC), New Delhi, for the year   2023-
24, together with the Auditor's Repo rt on the Accounts and the comments 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6390/18/26] 
  (2)  Statement (in English and Hindi) gi ving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
       (ii)     (1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-
section (1) of Section 15 of the Betwa River Board Act, 1976:– 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI RAJ BHUSHAN 
CHOUDHARY): Sir, on behalf of Shri Satish Chandra Dubey, I lay on the Table, under 
clause (2) of Section 19A of the Comptro ller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Services) Act, 1971, a copy  (in English and Hindi) of the Report of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Operational Performance of NLC India 
Limited - Union Government - Ministry of Coal - No. 35 of 2025 (Performance Audit-
Commercial). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6365/18/26] 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Betwa River Board (BRB), Jhansi, 
Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2024-25, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts.     
(b) Review by the Government on the working of the above Board. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6389/18/26] 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
Report and Account (2023-24) of Rohini He liport Limited, New Delhi and related 
papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI RAJ BHUSHAN 
CHOUDHARY): Sir, on behalf of Shri Murlidhar Mohol, I lay on the Table:– 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:– 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Rohini Heliport Limited, New Delhi, for 
the year 2023-24, together with the Au ditor's Report on  the Accounts and 
the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 6396/18/26] 
(2)  Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
7

MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Matters to be Raised with Permission.  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I have given notice. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No!  We will discuss everything later. Let us not disturb the  
House. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, please, one minute.  This is  a very important issue.  Please 
allow me.  Sir, I have given notice, under Rules 187, 188 and 189, of breach of 
privilege against the hon. Minister of Comme rce and Industry, Mr. Piyush Goyal.  He 
has given an interview with regard to polic y decision of the Government outside the 
House when Parliament is in Session. It am ounts to breach of privilege of this House. 
I already said that it is the violation of propriety of the House.   
MR. CHAIRMAN : This has already been discussed. …(Interruptions)… One 
minute....(Interruptions)... 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सभापित जी, एलओपी खड़े हȅ, आप उनकी बात तो सुन  
लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)… Sir, this is an important issue. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka): Sir, you allow him. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. Let me complete. …(Interruptions)… This has already 
been discussed. The Minister has already ma de a statement in the House. I will look 
into it later. ...(Interruptions)... 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) : No, no,  
Sir. …(Interruptions)… Mr. Chairman, the issue is serious. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, he has made a policy statement outside the  
House. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Matters Raised with Permission. Shrimati Sudha Murty. 
Need for safeguarding heritage sites from natural hazards and climate-related risks 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY (Nominated) : Thank you very much, Sir, for giving me 
time to speak.  Sir, climate change is not in our hands. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Sir,... 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. CHAIRMAN : I am telling you. I will go into it later. Please sit  
down. …(Interruptions)… Let the House run with its usual Business.  
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY: It is natural. It is universal. …(Interruptions)… But climate 
change is going to affect ou r heritage sites. Heritage sites are very important to us. 
...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : Sir, the LoP is on his legs. Kindly allow  
him. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: * 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Nothing will go on record, ex cept Shrimati Sudha Murty’s 
submission. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY: Heritage sites are very important, because they represent 
India... ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This has been widely discussed on that day. …(Interruptions)… The 
decision was taken on that day. …(Interruptions)… Let me consider it  
later. …(Interruptions)… Please don’t disturb the House. …(Interruptions)… Shrimati 
Sudha Murty, please continue. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY:  In this regard, I want to talk about what happens in the 
climate change. No.1; there is erratic rainfall.  …(Interruptions)… No.2; there is 
earthquake. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, Khargeji, you are an elderly Member. Please take your seat. 
Let the House run with its usual Business. …(Interruptions)… Every time you are 
raising the same issue! How can I agree? ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY : No.3; there is rising sea level. And, there are  
cyclones. …(Interruptions)…  All these things are going to affect our heritage sites. For 
example, let us look at our heritage sites, like Konark... ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Nothing will go on record, except Shrimati Sudha Murty’s 
submission. Ãलीज़ बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... I am listening to you. We have already 
discussed it. We cannot discuss the same ma tter again and again. Please, take your  
seat. ...(Interruptions)... 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
9

SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY : There are the Western Ghats and there are also  
lakes. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am protecting democracy. That is why I allowed you to speak on 
that day. A decision has been taken on that day. …(Interruptions)… Let me look  
into it.  
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY: Excess heat will destroy… …(Interruptions)… And humidity 
will destroy our paintings which are time immemorial. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You are right. …(Interruptions)… You cannot disrupt the House in 
running with its usual Business. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY: In this connection, I would lik e to suggest to the ASI that 
some policy should be made. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN : T h a t  i s  w h a t  I  t o l d  y o u .  …(Interruptions)… He has raised it. I told 
him, I will come back to him later. ...(Interruptions)... 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY: For example, they should cr eate a national framework for 
protection of these heritage sites against the natural calamities and climate change. 
Secondly, there should be a resilient way of protecting them. Thirdly, control on 
vegetation near riverbed monuments. Four thly, our ancestors always had mangroves 
before village on seashore which we have forgotten. By creating that, we can save 
our national monuments from cyclones. Fi fthly, the Himalayan Mountains are very 
delicate by nature. So, on-road and excessi ve tourism should not be done, because 
it is not good for the national heritage, particularly forts. Coming to a place like 
Rajasthan where there is less rain, now, du e to climate change, there is excessive 
rain and drainage system is not designed for that.  So, we should take care that in 
such an area modern methodologies should  be used in case of climate change.  
Sixthly, where there is excessive heat  and monuments are open, we should  
have... …(Time-bell rings.)…           
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sudh a Murty: Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu (Nominate), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala),          
Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra ), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
(Jharkhand), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odi sha), Shrimati Maya Narolia (Madhya 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Pradesh), Shri Sat Paul Sharma (Jammu and Kashmir), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Ms. Sw ati Maliwal (NCT Delhi), Shri Kanad  
Purkayastha (Assam), Shri Madan Rathor e (Rajasthan), Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
(Assam), Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla (Nominated), Shri Mayankkumar Nayak 
(Gujarat), Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu and Kashmir), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri R.Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu) and Dr. Meenakshi Jain (Nominated).                  
Now, Shri Tiruchi Siva. 
Concern over the new Draft Labour Rules and the National Labour and Employment 
Policy and their impact under Labour Codes 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, the NDA Government passed the Code on 
Wages Bill in 2019 and three more Codes, that is, Code on Occupational Safety, 
Health and Working Conditions, Code on Soci al Security and the Industrial Relations 
Code were passed in 2020. Since it was passed during the pandemic period, no 
discussions took place elaborately.  Now, these four Codes subsume already existing 
29 laws, including the Industrial Disputes Act and the Factories Act. The Union 
Government has framed these rules vide notification in November 2025. But, since 
‘labour’ comes under the Concurrent List, the States also should frame rules and 
notify the same. Otherwise, these cannot be implemented. Any law, without taking 
into consideration the concerns of the stakeholders, cannot be implemented at all. 
Now, the Central Trade Unions are making great protests and are not agreeing 
to it.  Except the four BJP-ruled States lik e Gujarat, Bihar and Arunachal Pradesh, all 
other States have not agreed to frame rules on this because  it is against the safety 
and welfare of the labour.  Now, it has become a big issue and the present situation is 
that virtually, there is no labour law to protect the labour class since all the earlier laws 
were subsumed in the Codes and the Codes are not implementable.  
Sir, in the absence of the Industrial Disputes Act and the Factories Act, various 
business and labour associations are distressed and are not able to resolve the issue.  
Sir, the Central Trade Union has announced a protest on February 12 th, which will be 
very serious. 
So, I urge the Government to take this seriously and repeal these four Codes. 
Hon. Labour Minister should immediately convene the Indian Labour Conference to 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
11

discuss the matter comprehensively while taking into confidence and consideration all 
the labour unions in the country and then re-dra ft the rules.  Otherwise, it will end up 
like the Farm Bills because it affects the la bour across the country and the Codes that 
have come now in place of the earlier laws have not served the purpose.  
So, kindly consider this matter very seriously while keeping in mind the 
concerns of the employees, labour and the business in the country. This is my 
submission. This is not just a Zero Hour ment ion.  It is about the protest that is going 
to take place on 12 th. The whole of India is going to protest against it. Once again, I 
urge the Government to take it seriously, repeal these Codes and re-draft the Rules. 
Thank you very much.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Tiruchi Siva: Shri Mallikarjun Kharge (Karnataka), 
Shrimati Sonia Gandhi (Rajasthan), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Gurwinder Singh Ob eroi (Jammu and Kashmir), Shri N.R. 
Elango (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahi m (Kerala), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala),  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shri Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal).  
Now, Shri Sat Paul Sharma. 
Concern over hardship arising from time limit on filing TDS correction statements 
SHRI SAT PAUL SHARMA  (Jammu and Kashmir) : Mr. Chairman, Sir, certain 
amendments were introduced by the Fina nce Act, 2024 to Section 200(3) of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961. These amen dments, effective from April 1 st, 2025, impose a 
six-year time limit for filing TDS correction statements calculated from the end of the 
financial year in which the original statement was required to be furnished.  
Sir, prior to this, there was no statutory time limit, allowing indefinite revisions 
for genuine errors like incorrect PAN details, challan mismatches or clerical mistakes. 
For TDS statements relating to financial ye ars prior to 2018-19, the six-year window 
had largely expired by March 31 st, 2025 in most of the cases.  As a result, corrections 
for this period became barred after that date aligning with the latest description of 
restrictions effective post-March 31 st, 2025. This has indeed led to reported 
hardships, including deductees not receiving proper TDS credit in Form 26AS 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

resulting in inflated tax demands or de layed/refused refunds. As a result, the 
deductors are facing demand for short dedu ctions, interest penalties under Sections 
201 and 220, and the potential prosecution or  litigation, despite having deducted and 
deposited the tax correctly. Sir, these issu es can arise even when the tax was duly 
paid, as mismatches prevent proper credit allocation.   
Mr. Chairman, Sir, the suggestion for one-time relief/condonation window or 
guidelines under Section 119 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is appropriate. Section 119 
empowers the CBDT to issue orders, instructions or directions to relax provisions in 
case of genuine hardships, including all cla sses of persons or income, while no such 
specific relief has been anno unced for pre-Financial Year 2018-19 periods. Similar 
condonation have already been  granted in the past for the TDS-related issues by the 
CBDT from time to time. Such relaxation can be given. I think it is viable. Thank you.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sat Paul Sh arma: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),       
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Gurwinder Si ngh Oberoi (Jammu and Kashmir),      
Shri Gulam Ali (Nominated), Dr. Medha Vish ram Kulkarni (Maharashtra), Shri Pradip 
Kumar Varma (Jharkhand), Shri Sujeet Ku mar (Odisha), Shrimati Maya Naroliya 
(Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Mamata Moha nta (Odisha), Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
(Assam), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Harsh 
Vardhan Shringla(Nominated).  
Now, Shriman Amar Pal Maurya.      
Demand to ensure permanent offices for MLAs and MPs by the Government              
in the constituency 
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर् (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक 
आपने मुझे अपनी बात रखने का मौका िदया। महोदय, आज मȅ आपके  माध् यम से इस सदन का 
ध्यान एक अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् िवषय की ओर आकृ Íट करना चाहता हूँ, जो भारत की लोकतांितर्क 
Ģणाली, जन-Ģितिनिधत्व की गिरमा तथा नागिरकȗ क े साथ संवाद की मूल भावना से Ģत्यक्ष रूप 
से जुड़ा हुआ है। महोदय, मेरा िवषय क्षेतर् मȂ िवध ायकȗ एवं सांसदȗ क े िलए, एमएलसी, राज्य सभा 
इन सभी जन-Ģितिनिधयȗ क े िलए Îथायी कायार्लय की ËयवÎथा क े संदभर् मȂ है।   
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक गर्ाम सभा का अपना एक कायार्लय 
है, Åलॉक क े क Ȃदर्ȗ क े अपने कायार्लय हȅ, िजला पंचायत क े क Ȃदर्ȗ क े भी Îथाई कायार्लय हȅ, पर 
सांसदȗ, िवध
ायकȗ, एमएलसी या राज्य सभा क े Îथायी कायार्लय की ËयवÎथाएं िनिÌचत नहीं है।  
क ु छ सरकारȂ हȅ, ऐसे क ु छ Îथान हȅ, जहाँ पर ËयवÎथाएं भी हȅ या िवकास भवनȗ मȂ एक कक्ष अलॉट 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
13

कर िदए जाते हȅ।  वहां पर क ंÃयूटर की ËयवÎथाएं भी नहीं होती हȅ। जो समाज से चुनकर जनता क े 
बीच मȂ आता है, वह कभी-कभी अपने घर मȂ ही एक ऑिफस खोल लेता है।  वहां लाखȗ की जनता 
होती है और कई बार पांच साल िवधायक या सांसद कोई और होता है और पांच साल बा द कोई 
और हो जाता है।  देश की आजादी क े बाद से कई बार ऐसे िवधान सभा या लोक सभा क्षेतर् हȅ, जो 
हर बार बदलते रहते हȅ। उस क्षेतर् की जनता को कई बार यह समझ मȂ नहीं आ पाता है िक उसके  
अपने िवधायक या सांसद क े कायार्लय की Îथायी ËयवÎथा कौन सी है, इसिलए थोड़ा सा उसके  
मन मȂ संकोच होता है। अगर कोई वतर्मान मȂ सांसद रहा और अगली बार वह चȂज हो गया, तो जो 
पतर्ाचार िक
या होता है, बाद मȂ उसका कोई डेटा नहीं रहता है। अगर थाने मȂ कोई एफआईआर हो 
जाए या कलेक्टर बदल जाता है या एसडीएम बदल जाता है, तो वह सारा संरिक्षत डेटा उसके  
साथ मȂ रहता है।   
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह कहना चाहता हूं िक अगर सांसदȗ और िव
धायकȗ, जो 
समाज और देश क े िलए कानून िनमार्ण मȂ सहायक होते हȅ, उनके  िलए एक Îथायी ËयवÎथा होगी 
और वहां पर आने वाली जो जनता है, उनके  िदए गए डाक्युमȂट्स या जो कागजात हȅ, उनक
ा 
ठीक से डाक्युमȂटेशन करके  वे शासन को भेजȂगे, तो उनकी ËयवÎथा मȂ और काम को करने मȂ एक 
िसिǉ ĢाÃत होगी। शासन क े ǎारा जो कायार्लय बनाया होता है - एक Ģाइवेट क े ǎारा जो 
कायार्लय होता है - तो वहाँ जाने मȂ जनता को िकसी भी Ģकार का संकोच नहीं होता।  पािर्टयां 
अलग-अलग होती हȅ, हर Ģदेश मȂ अलग-अलग पािर्टयां हȅ, कहीं ट ू पाटीर्ज़ हȅ, कहीं फोर पाटीर्ज़ 
हȅ, तो अगर जनता को न्
याय देना है - जैसे मोदी सरकार आज परफॉमर्, िरफॉमर् क े िलए जानी जा 
रही है और जैसे देश मȂ अन्य ËयवÎथाओं मȂ बहुत सारे सुधार हो रहे हȅ, तो इसमȂ भी सुधार होना 
चािहए।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहता हूँ िक अगर इस Ëय
वÎथा मȂ सांसदȗ और िवधायकȗ क े 
कायार्लय क े संबंध मȂ सुधार हȗगे, तो बहुत न्यायपूणर् होगा।             
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associat
ed themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Amar Pal Maurya: Shrimati Su mitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri Khiru Mahto (Bihar),           
Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel (Gujarat), Shri Sat Paul Sh arma (Jammu and Kashmir), 
Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee (Tripura), Ms. Indu Bala 
Goswami (Himachal Pradesh), Shri Babubhai Jesa ngbhai Desai (Gujarat),           
Shri Deepak Prakash (Jharkhand), Dr. Sikand er Kumar (Himachal Prad esh),         
Shri Sanjay Seth (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Brij 
Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Neeraj Shekha r (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Surendra Singh 
Nagar (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Kavita Patida r (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Ram Chander 
Jangra (Haryana), Shri Naresh Bans al (Uttarakhand), Dr. Radha Mohan Das 
Agrawal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (M adhya Pradesh),                  
Shri Mayankkumar Nayak (Gujarat), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
(Uttar Pradesh), Ms. Swati Maliwal (NCT of Delhi), Shrimati Geeta alias 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Se ema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh),       
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland) , Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
(Gujarat), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi (Meghalaya),            
Shri Baburam Nishad (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Pr adip Kumar Varma (Jharkhand),       
Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh (Uttar Pradesh),  Shrimati Darshana Singh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Krishnaiah Ryaga (Andhra Pradesh), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), 
Shri Rwngwra Narzary (Assam), Shri Kartik eya Sharma (Haryana ), Shri Maharaja 
Sanajaoba (Manipur), Shri Govindbhai La ljibhai Dholakia (Gujarat), Harsh Vardhan 
Shringla (Nominated), Shri Dorjee Tshering  Lepcha (Sikkim), Shri Subhash Barala 
(Haryana), Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  (Karnataka), Shrimati Mamata Mohanta 
(Odisha), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Gulam Ali (Nominated), 
Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),      
Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhy a Pradesh), Shri P. Wilson (Tam il Nadu) and          
Shri Kanad Purkayastha (Assam).        
Now, Shriman Subhash Barala. 
Need for Government intervention to address the agricultural and public health crisis 
caused by arsenic contamination of groundwater in Haryana 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला (हिरयाणा): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन का ध्यान एक बहुत 
ही महत्वपूणर् िवषय की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूं। यह क ेवल हिरयाणा नहीं, बिÊक पूरे देश की 
समÎया है। यह समÎया Îव
ाÎथ्य एवं क ृिष संकट की ओर ध्यान आकिर्षत करती है। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, क Ȃदर्ीय भूजल बोडर् की िरपोटर् क े अनुसार, जो हमारा भूिमगत 
जल है, उसमȂ आसȃिनक की मातर्ा लगातार बढ़ती जा रही है, जो िनधार्िरत सीमा से काफी ज्यादा 
है।अगर हम हिरयाणा की िरपोटर् की बा
त करȂ, तो 18 िजलȗ मȂ इस Ģकार की िरपोटर् आई है िक जो 
भूिमगत जल है, उसमȂ आसȃिनक की मातर्ा इतनी अिधक है, िजसके  कार ण  से गंभीर ÎवाÎथ्य 
संबंधी समÎयाएं खड़ी होती िदख रही हȅ। इसके  कारण क ȅसर रोग, ǭदय रोग, त्वचा रोग व बच्चȗ 
क े अंदर कई Ģकार की बीमािरयां, जैसे मानिसक िवकार आिद की संभावनाएं िदखाई देती हȅ। 
इसके  साथ ही, िमƺी की जो उपजाऊ क्षमता है, उसके  ऊपर भी इसका गह रा असर िदखाई देता 
है। यह िÎथित जैसा मȅने कहा, क ेवल क ृिष तक सीिमत नहीं है, बिÊक यह ÎवाÎथ्य संबंधी बहुत 
बड़ी समÎया भी बनती िदखाई दे रही है।  
 मान्यवर, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ क ृिष क्षेतर् क े अंदर एवं जल संरक्षण की 
योजनाओं क े ऊपर पूरे देश मȂ बहुत काम हुआ है, िजसके  िलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद एवं आभार Ģकट करता हूँ, िकन्तु इस मूक संकट से िनपटने क े िलए ठोस 
कदम उठाने की बहुत आवÌयकता है। इसके  िलए मȅ क Ȃ दर् सर
कार से अनुरोध करता हूँ िक हमȂ 
िनÇन बातȗ क े ऊपर ध्यान देना चािह
ए। एक तो Ģभािवत क्षेतर्ȗ क े अंदर नहरी एवं सतही जल 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
15

िंसचाई पिरयोजनाओं को अितशीघर् पूरा िकया जाए। इसके  साथ ही, हिरयाणा मȂ एक बहुत अच्छी 
योजना चली थी - 'मेरा पानी मेरी िवरासत'। इस Ģकार की योजना को और ज्यादा मजबूत करने 
क े िलए क Ȃ दर् सरकार से मदद दी जाए। इसी Ģकार से आईसीएआर ǎारा कम आसȃिनक अवशोषण 
वाली फसलȗ की िकÎमȗ क े ऊपर अनुसंधान पर जोर िदया जाए और हिरयाणा जैसे क्षेतर्, जहां पर 
सेमगर्Îत पानी ज्यादा है, उसकी िन
कासी क े Ģबंध िकए जाएं। मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार से यही अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ। आपने मुझे समय िदया, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्
यवाद।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Subh ash Barala: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Sh ri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana),   
Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shri mati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Darshana Singh (Uttar Pradesh) , Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand),       
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh) and     
Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu (Nominated).      
  
Dr. M. Thambidurai. Not present. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
Concern over mining approval in Tadoba Tiger Corridor despite opposition by    
Wildlife Board Committee 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharashtra ): Sir, I rise to draw the attention 
of this House to a matter of grave environm ental and public safety concern. It is 
regarding the recent approval granted by the Maharashtra Government for a private 
iron ore mining company in the Tadoba Ti ger Corridor. This decision defies both 
environmental prudence and its own Ex pert Committee's recommendations. In 
October 2024, a three-Member Committee wa s formed by the State Wildlife Board, 
which was to check the proposal that ca me from a private limited company that 
would create 120 jobs for the people in the region. Out of that, only 32 would be 
permanent. In their detailed submission, thes e three experts had said that any mining 
in this forest would cause irreversible damage to the enviro nment and wildlife. 
Therefore, the project was not recommend ed. Ignoring this recommendation, the 
State Wildlife Board has allowed this proposal to go through and has sent this request 
to the National Wildlife Board for permission. My Party Leader, Shri Aaditya Thackeray 
ji, who is the former Environm ent Minister, has taken up th is issue because this will 
create a huge environmental damage in the St at e of Maharashtra. What is at stake? 
Sir, 18,000 trees across 35 hectares of land will be destroyed. A critical tiger corridor 
connecting India's largest National Park, home to 250 of our country’s approximately 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

4,000 tigers, will be in problem. Over 650 v illages are facing an increased threat of 
human-tiger conflict. The habitat of 60-plus tigers along with leopards, bears, wild 
dogs and countless other species will be harmed. When a Government's own Expert 
Committee unanimously opposes a project, ci ting irreversible environmental damage 
and threat to both wildlife and human lives, on what scientific or ethical grounds has 
this approval been granted? This is not an  isolated incident. From the Aravallis to 
mangrove ecosystems, we are witnessi ng the systematic dismantling of 
environmental protection. Today it is Tadoba, tomorrow it could be any other 
protected forest in our country.  
Sir, through you, I request the Environmen t Minister to deny this approval and 
not allow the Tadoba Tiger Corridor to be damaged and the ecosystem to collapse 
just under the garb of development which will only create 120 jobs.  It is not creating a 
huge lifeline change or ecosystem chan ge. Please protect our environment and 
ensure that the Tadoba Tiger Corridor is not harmed in any way by these private 
mining institutions. Thank you so much, Sir.                                                         
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Priy anka Chaturvedi: Shrimati Sonia Gandhi 
(Rajasthan), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri A. A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal),         
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sanjay Yadav (Bihar ), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),    
Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal) and Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh).   
Demand for inclusion of Meetei Mayek script alongside Bengali script for the Manipuri 
optional question paper in UPSC Examinations 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA (Man ipur): Sir, for the Civil Services 
Examinations conducted by UPSC, candidates with Manipuri as an optional subject 
are permitted to write answers in either Bengali script or Meetei Mayek script. 
However, the question paper for the Manipuri optional paper is printed only in Bengali 
script. This practice is placing the candidates, who do not understand the Bengali 
script, at a very disadvantaged situation be cause Bangla or Bengali script had been 
completely replaced by Meetei Mayek scri pt for teaching in schools, colleges and 
universities for the last 20 years or so in Manipur. Consequently, almost all students 
have been educated entirely in Meetei Mayek and do not possess functional literacy in 
the Bengali script. However, UPSC co mpelled these candidates to read and 
understand the questions set only in Beng ali script undermining their language 
proficiency. As a result, many willing can didates are discouraged from opting for 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
17

Manipuri as their optional subject. It is also  to be respectfully stated that there is no 
academic or technical impediment to prin t the question paper in Meetei Mayek 
alongside Bangla script, as is done for ot her languages with multiple scripts. The 
printing of questions in both Bangla and Meetei Mayek will uphold the principles of 
fairness, inclusivity and constitutional resp ect for India's linguistic diversity, and will 
improve the UPSC examination system. As su ch, it is demanded that the matter may 
be brought to the attention of UPSC and co ncerned authority and to rectify it at an 
early date. Thank you.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Maharaja  Sanajaoba Leishemba:  Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Kanad 
Purkayastha (Assam).                        
Demand for development of Marang Buru, Mudma and Rohtasgarh as a            
Special Cultural Corridor 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश (झारखंड): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार का ध्यान 
देश की Ģाचीनतम संÎकृ ित क े ध्वजवाहक उरांव और संथाली आिदवासी समाजȗ की अिÎमता 
और उनके  पिवतर् तीथर्Îथलȗ की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहत ा हूं। 
"जहां पुरखȗ की खुशबू है, 
वहां आÎथा का डेरा है। 
वह रोहतासगढ़, वह मुड़मा, वह मारंग बुरु, 
पहचान का सवेरा है।" 
सभापित महोदय, उरांव समाज का गौरवशाली इितहास िबहार क े रोह तासगढ़ से जुड़ा 
हुआ है, जो उनकी Îमृितयȗ का क Ȃ दर् है, उनका पिवतर् Îथल है और उनकी आÎथा का क Ȃ दर् िंबदु है।  
वहीं रांची क े मांडर मȂ िÎथत 'मुड़मा Îथल' न क ेवल एक धािर्मक शिƪ खूंटा है, बिÊक यहीं से उस 
'पड़हा परंपरा' की शुरुआत हुई थी, िजसने आिदवािसयȗ को राजन
ीितक, Ģशासिनक और 
सामािजक सूतर् मȂ िपरोने का काम िकया था। आज भी इस Îथल पर लाखȗ लोग आते हȅ और वह 
वहाँ क े लाखȗ आिदवािस यȗ की आÎथा का क Ȃ दर् िंबदु भी है।  
महोदय, इसी Ģकार से संथाली समाज की अटू ट आÎथा का Ģतीक 'मारंग बुरु' पारसनाथ 
पहाड़ मȂ िÎथत है।  यह क ेवल एक पवर्त नहीं है, बिÊक संथालȗ का सवȘच्च देवता और उनके  
अिÎतत्व की पहचान है, लेिकन दुभार्ग्
यपूणर् यह िÎथित है िक वहां आधारभूत संरचना का अभाव है।  
वहां पानी, िबजली और सड़क की िÎथित दयनीय है।   
 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

"अिÎतत्व िबना पहचान कहां, जड़ िबना कोई सÇमान कहां?" 
महोदय, आज ये वैिÌवक धरोहर बुिनयादी सुिवधाओं क े िलए तरस रहे हȅ। िवरासत 
सुरिक्षत रहेगी, तभी आिदवािसयत बचेगी।  इसिलए सरकार से मेरी मांग है िक मारंग बुरु, मुड़मा 
और रोहतासगढ़ को एक िविशÍट सांÎकृ ितक कॉिरडोर बना करके , आिदवािसयत को बचाने का 
काम करे, ध
न्यवाद।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Deepak  Prakash: Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
(Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Baburam Nishad  (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Brij La l (Uttar Pradesh),      
Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel (Bihar), Shri  Pradip Kumar Varma (Jharkhand),   
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shri  Khiru Mahto (Bihar),               
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh).  
Need for conservation and promotion of the Kathiawari horse breed 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA (Gujarat):  &“Hon. Chairman, Sir, I extend my sincere 
thanks for granting me this opportunity to  address the vital issue of preserving and 
promoting the Kathiawari horse breed. Today , I urge the Government's attention to 
safeguarding and advancing the Kathiawari horse—an indigenous breed that stands 
as Gujarat's pride and a profound symbol of  India's valor and cultural heritage. Its 
extraordinary strength, resilience against ha rsh climates, distinctive "Rewal gait," 
and inwardly curved ears render it uniquel y unparalleled in the world. These horses 
were meticulously bred for enduring batt lefield combat. History testifies to the 
sacrifices of countless heroes in defending our nation, their tales forever intertwined 
with these noble steeds. Even today, cava lry remains indispensable in our army and 
paramilitary forces. Incorporating our indige nous horses into na tional security and 
Government initiatives would honor our heritage authentically and mark a bold stride 
toward self-reliance.  Regrettably, cross-breeding and inadequate management have 
pushed this pure breed to the brink of extinc tion. If we do not act now, it will be lost 
irretrievably. 
Sir, Kathiawari horses hold vast potential for equine tourism, rural 
employment, and sports. Hosting horse exhibitions, competitions, and fairs would 
elevate rural incomes and inspire the youth to cherish this legacy. Today, breeders 
sustain themselves by raising foals; with government backing, this enterprise could 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Gujarati.  
 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
19

fortify the rural economy.  Sir, our Prim e Minister has consistently championed 
indigenous breeds, as exemplified by the induction of 'Mudhol Hound' dogs into the 
army. The horse stands alone as the only domesticated animal to compete in the 
Olympic Games. I therefore implore the Gove rnment to craft a comprehensive equine 
policy, encompassing subsidies, insuran ce, and incentives for animal husbandry. 
Furthermore, I humbly request the establishmen t of a regional center for the 'National 
Research Centre on Equines' (NRCE) in Gujarat's Saurashtra region. Additionally, 
the Kathiawari horse merits a GI (Geographical Indication) tag, granting it regional 
recognition, shielding breeders from count erfeit impostors, and bestowing global 
acclaim.  Through these measures, we can rescue this magnificent breed, generate 
rural jobs, and ensure the Kathiawari hors e gallops on eternally as an emblem of 
India's pride and power.  Thank you, Sir.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shri Kesridevsinh Jh ala: Shrimati Sadhna Singh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Naveen Jain (Uttar Pr adesh), Shri Balyogi Umeshnath (Madhya 
Pradesh), Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsi nh (Gujarat), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai 
Dholakia (Gujarat), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Rajathi 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Mayankkumar Nayak (Guj arat), Shrimati Darshana Singh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasth an), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai 
Desai (Gujarat), (Ends) Shri Sadanand Mh alu Shet Tanavade (Goa) and Dr. Kavita 
Patidar (Madhya Pradesh).       
Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla. 
Demand for railway underpass at Binnabari Gram Panchayat in Darjeeling 
SHRI HARSH VARDHAN SHRINGLA (Nominated): Hon. Chairman, Sir, I rise to draw 
the attention of this august House to a matt er of urgent public importance that affects 
the daily lives of thousands of residents of  Binnabari Gram Panchayat under Kharibari 
Block of Phansidewa in Darjeeling dist rict. Nearly 50,000 to 60,000 people, 
predominantly small and marginal farmers, reside in this region. Although Kharibari 
market lies merely 7-8 kilometres from th e railway crossing, the absence of a rail 
underpass or gate has become a severe  impediment to mobility and livelihood. 
Farmers are compelled to take a long and costly diversion to transport vegetables and 
agricultural produce. As a result, by the ti me they reach the market, prices often fall 
causing direct income losses and in many cases, loss of valuable produce. This is not 
merely a matter of economics, it is a seri ous concern of safety , access and dignity. 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

The rural hospital and higher secondary sc hools are located across the railway line. 
During medical emergencies, patients face  dangerous delays while school children 
are forced to cross the railway tracks daily  creating constant anxiety for parents and 
teachers alike.  
Sir, under the visionary leadership of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, 
railway infrastructure development and the elimination of unsafe crossings have 
become prioritized nationwide in the interest  of public safety. I,  therefore, earnestly 
request the Ministry of Railways, in c oordination with the Ministry of Rural 
Development, to urgently sanction and co nstruct a rail underpass or rail gate at the 
crossings under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana road in Binnabari  Gram 
Panchayat. This single inte rvention will significantly enhance agricultural marketing, 
ensure student safety, improve healthcare access and safeguard lives.      
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Sat Paul Sharma (Jammu and Kashmir), Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), 
Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra), Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), 
Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri R. Girirajan, (Tamil Nadu),       
Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).      
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. 
Concern over the plight of marginalised patients in accessing efficient and       
effective healthcare at AIIMS, Delhi 
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar): Thank you hon. Chairman, Sir, for allowing me 
to raise this very important issue and I am very glad that the L eader of the House and 
hon. Health Minister is also here.   
Since the month of September, on account of a deep personal  family crisis, I 
have spent three to four months in All India Institute of Medical Sciences. After 
coming from there, मȅने एक अंगर्ेजी दैिनक मȂ एक लेख भी िलखा िक एÇस अÎपताल महज 
अÎपताल नहीं है खास करके  एÇस, िदÊली, लेिकन मेरी िंचता उस आलेख मȂ यह भी थी िक जो भी 
एÇस इनके  दौर मȂ या आपके  दौर मȂ खोले गए हȅ अलग-अलग क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, वे पेशंट को होÊड क्य
ȗ नहीं 
कर पा रहे हȅ? अभ ी भी िजस Ģकार की भीड़, िजस Ģकार की िदक्कतȗ का सामना करके  there is 
absolute mismatch, जो एक िडमांड है और जो ओपीडी capacity है, मȅने वहाँ क े डॉक्टसर्, 
नसȃज़, सपोटर् Îटाफ, पैरा मेिडकल Îटाफ की जीवनशैली देखी है। 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
21

सर, चूंिक मȅ वहाँ चार महीने रहा, तो मȅने एÇस की सुबह देखी, एÇस की शाम देखी।  मȅने 
मौसम को बदलते देखा, लेिकन जो चीज़ पीड़ादायक थी, वह मȅ बताता हूँ।  चूंिक रिजÎटर्ेशन अब 
ऑनलाइन भी हो गया है तो डेट आगे की िमला करती है, लेिकन कई पेशȂट्स ऐसे होते हȅ, िजनकी 
बीमारी कर्ॉिनक है, वे परेशान रहते हȅ और वे यहाँ आ जाते हȅ। सर, मȅ िफर दोहरा रहा हूँ िक एÇस 
उनके  िलए महज एक अÎपताल नहीं है, बिÊक वह उनकी आिखरी आशा है। वह last island of 
hope है। सर, वैसे तो शेÊटर होÇस हȅ, लेिकन मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करूँगा िक उनकी ऐसी 
पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ उनके  रहने क े िलए क ु छ समुिचत ËयवÎथा होनी चािहए। सर, मȅ ऐसा इसिलए कह 
रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक आपने जो बाकी क े एÇस खोले हȅ, अगर उनमȂ भी उसी लेवल का िरसचर्, उसी 
लेवल की engagement, उसी लेवल का compassion, उसी लेवल का endurance होता, तो 
एÇस, िदÊली मȂ जो workload है और जैसा मȅने कहा िक वहाँ िकस Ģकार की िदक्कतȂ हȅ, वे 
शायद नहीं होतीं।   
सर, हम एक चीज़ अक्सर नजरअंदाज कर जाते हȅ। सरकार मȂ कोई भी हो, जब कोई 
daily wage earner एक पेशȂट क े caretaker की भूिमका मȂ होता है, तो वह medical poverty क े 
trap मȂ फ ँ स जाता है। हमने िकताबȗ मȂ अक्सर structural poverty क े बारे मȂ पढ़ा है और उसी पर 
हमारा फोकस रहता है, लेिकन आज medical poverty एक िवकराल रूप लेती जा रही है।  सर, 
उसके  पीछे एक तकर्  और भी है िक हमारे health sector का झुकाव िनजी क्षेतर् की ओर लगातार 
बढ़ता जा रहा है। मेरा िनजी क्षेतर् से कोई िवरोध नहीं है, लेिकन सावर्जिनक उपकर्मȗ मȂ अगर हमने 
इन्वेÎट नहीं िकया और वह दायरा नहीं बढ़ाया, तो मुिÌकल होगी। माननीय सभापित महोदय, 
आपका बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या।    
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha: Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala),      
Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu an d Kashmir), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Narain Dass 
Gupta (NCT Delhi), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Shri Muzibulla 
Khan (Odisha), Shri Debashish Samantaray  (Odisha), Shri Khiru Mahto (Bihar), 
Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  (Uttar Pradesh), 
Shri Prem Chand Gupta (Bihar), Ms. Dola  Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (M aharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Shri P. Wils on (Tamil Nadu) and Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham, (Kerala).       
Shriman Akhilesh Prasad Singh. 
Need for establishment of a semiconductor hub and integrated Industrial Park in Bihar 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह (िबहार): चेयरमैन सर, आज आपने िबहार क े लोगȗ को लगातार मौका 
िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ। सर, आज भारत अपनी सेमीकं डक्टर 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

आवÌयकताओं का लगभग 85-90 Ģितशत आयात करता है, िजससे देश की इलेक्टर्ॉिनक्स, 
ऑटोमोबाइल, दूरसंचार, रक्षा और िडिजटल अथर्ËयवÎथा अत्यिधक रूप से वैिÌवक आपूिर्त-
Ǜृंखलाओं पर िनभर्र हो गई है।  
एक माकȃ ट िरपोटर् क े अनुसार, वषर् 2022 मȂ भारत का घरेलू सेमीकं डक्टर बाज़ार लगभग 
27 अरब अमेिरकी डॉलर का था, िजसके  वषर् 2030 तक 80 से 100 अरब अमेिरकी डॉलर तक 
पहुँचने का अनुमान है। यह तेज वृिǉ भारत क े िलए एक बड़ा अवसर है, लेिकन साथ ही यह 
रणनीितक जोिखम भी उजागर करती है, जैसा िक कोिवड-19 और वैिÌवक िचप संकट क े दौरान 
ÎपÍट रूप से देखा गया। इसी रणनीितक कमजोरी को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए भारत सरकार ने 
सेिमकॉन इंिडया िमशन की Îथापना की थी, लेिकन िबहार की जो िÎथित है, उसमȂ 7.5 करोड़  
युवा लगभग 25 साल  से नीचे की आयु-वगर् क े हȅ। सर, लॉिजिÎटक्स, क ेिमकÊस, ट ूिंलग, 
पैक ेिंजग, रख-रखाव, MSME और सिर्वस सेक्टर क े माध्यम से 2-3 गुना अिधक अĢत्यक्ष 
रोजगार सृिजत होने की संभावना रहती है। िबहार मȂ इलेक्टर्ॉिनक्स और सेमीकं डक्टर औǏोिगक 
पाकș की Îथापना से न क ेवल क्षेतर्ीय असंतुलन कम होगा, बिÊक बड़े पैमाने पर होने वाले Ǜिमक 
पलायन पर भी Ģभावी रोक लगेगी और राज्य को पहली बार उच्च-ĢौǏोिगकी िविनमार्ण से जोड़ा 
जा सके गा। 
अतः मȅ सरकार से यह आगर्ह करता हूँ िक िबहार मȂ सेमीकं डक्टर हब और एकीकृ त 
औǏोिगक पाकș की Îथापना हेतु क Ȃ दर्-राज्य उǏोग साझेदारी क े माध्यम से लिक्षत कर Ģोत्साहन, 
पूंजीगत सिÅसडी तथा Plug and Play बुिनयादी ढांचा उपलÅध कराया जाए। साथ ही, िबहार को 
राÍटर्ीय सेमीकं डक्टर एवं इलेक्टर्ॉिनक्स िविनमार्ण रोडमैप मȂ औपचािरक और ÎपÍट रूप से 
शािमल िकया जाए, तािक िबहार, जो िवकास क े रोडमैप से लगातार छू टा हुआ है, उसको 
centre-stage पर लाने की कोिशश हो। आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।              
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh: Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Shrimati Sonia Gandhi (Rajasthan), Shri Mallikarjun Kharge (Kar nataka), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Raj asthan), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam, 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Pramod Tiwari (Rajasth an), Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu),    
Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana ), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Sanjay Yadav 
(Bihar) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, (Kerala). 
Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil. 
  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
23

Concern over severe drought crisis in Latur, Marathwada and                          
Vidarbha regions of Maharashtra 
Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल (महाराÍटर्): माननीय सभापित महोदय, अन्नदाता, जो इस 
देश का सबसे Ģमुख घटक है, िजसका Ģमाण हमारे देश मȂ 65 परसȂट से ज्यादा है, आज उसी 
अन्नदाता क े िवषय मȂ मȅ सदन का ध्यान आकृ Íट करना चाहती हूँ। यह अन्नदाता, िजसे हम 
िकसान कहते हȅ, हमेशा उपेिक्षत रहा है और आज उसे सबसे अिधक सहायता की आवÌयकता है। 
मȅ िवशेष रूप से अपने क्षेतर् मराठव
ाड़ा क े िकसानȗ की िÎथित क े बारे मȂ बात करना चाहती हूँ। यिद 
पूरे देश मȂ िकसानȗ की आत्महत्या
ओं क े सबसे अिधक मामले कहीं हȅ, तो वह मराठवाड़ा और 
िवदभर् क्षेतर् मȂ हȅ। मेरे Îवयं क े बीड िज़ले मȂ ही इस वषर् कम से कम ढाई सौ से अिधक िकसानȗ ने 
आत्महत्या की है। सरकार इस का
लखंड को ‘अमृत काल’ कहती है, लेिकन िकसानȗ क े िलए यह 
काल ‘िवष काल’ बन चुका है, क्यȗिक जब तक िकसान िवष नहीं पीता, तब तक उसे मुिƪ नहीं 
िमलती, यह सही है और सच बात है। 
सर, कभी अकाल आता है, तो कभ
ी अत्यिधक वषार् हो जाती है, िजससे हमारी ज़मीन 
खराब हो जाती है। वह कम उपजाऊ रह जाती है, न फसल ठीक से होती है, न उत्पादन पयार्Ãत 
होता है। िकसान कज़र् लेता है, लेिकन उसे repay नहीं कर सकता। बच्चȗ की पढ़ाई नहीं करा 
सकता, बेिटयȗ की शा
दी नहीं कर सकता और इसी दुÍचकर् मȂ हमारा िकसान उलझ जाता है। 
अंतत: िकसान क े सामने मृत्यु को गले लगाने क े अितिरƪ कोई िवकÊप शेष नहीं रह जाता। 
कर् ेिडट कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटी, िजला सहकारी बȅक, राÍटर्ीयकृ त बȅक आिद क े दुÍच
कर् मȂ हमारा 
िकसान फ ँ स जाता है। छोटी-सी रकम पर भी Åयाज पर Åयाज लगते-लगते वह मानिसक, 
सामािजक और आिर्थक रूप से ट ू ट जाता है। महोदय, यह अत्यंत दुभार्ग्यपूणर् है िक बड़े-बड़े 
उǏोगपित, चाहे वह माÊया हो, नीरव मोदी हो या लिलत मो
दी हो, वे हजारȗ करोड़ रुपये का 
कज़र् लेकर देश से भाग जाते हȅ, जबिक िकसान क े पास कहीं भागने का िवकÊप नहीं होता। उसे 
अपने गाँव मȂ ही रहना है और समाज क े बीच रहना है तो अपनी इज्ज़त बचाकर जीना है और जब 
यह संभव नहीं हो पाता, तो वह मौत को गले लगाने को िववश हो जात
ा है। इसीिलए डॉ. 
Îवामीनाथन आयोग ǎारा सुझाई गई legalised MSP की ËयवÎथा, जो हमारे नेता राहुल गांधी जी 
बार-बार कह रहे थे िक legalised MSP लागू करना अत्यंत आव
Ìयक है। मेरे खुद क े िडिÎटर्क्ट मȂ 
256 आत्महत्याएं हो गईं, छतर्पित संभाजीनगर मȂ 224, ना ंदेड़ मȂ 170, धारािशव मȂ 141 और 
परभणी मȂ 104 आत्महत्याएं हो गईं। इस Ģकार क ु ल िमलाकर साढ़े ग्
यारह सौ से अिधक 
आत्महत्याएं इस साल हो गई हȅ, जो िपछले 5 वषș मȂ िकसानȗ की सबसे ज्यादा आत्महत्याएं हमारे 
एिरया मȂ हुई हȅ। क्षेतर्ीय िक सान  इसके  िलए िववश क्यȗ हो जाता है, मुझे यह बताना है... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shrimati Rajani As hokrao Patil: Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Shrimati Sonia Gandhi (Rajasthan), Shri Mallikarjun Kharge (Karnataka), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Ker ala), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal ), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan (Chhattisgarh), Shri Anil 
Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh),             
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).  
Shri Sujeet Kumar. 
Need to operationalize a permanent Indian Space Force to safeguard               
national security and strategic interests 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha): Sir, I rise to request the Government to consider the 
establishment of an independent Space Force to safeguard India's strategic interest in 
outer space. Space is no longer merely scientific. It is a strategic domain. Our 
communications, navigation, banking, surve illance, and military operations depend 
on space-based assets. Any disruption in or bit can cripple national security on the 
ground. Our Government, under the visiona ry leadership of Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi, has demonstrated our capab ilities with the creation of the Defence 
Space Agency in 2019 and the Defence Space Research Organisation. Today, ISRO's 
achievements command global respect. The hi storic success of An ti-Satellite Missile 
tests (ASAT) has established India as a cr edible space power. Along with all these 
achievements, an independent space force is  also a strategic necessity, today. Our 
greatest strategic adversary, China, operates a dedicated strategic support force; US 
established its space force in 2019. So, we  cannot afford institutional complacency 
when other nations are recognizing our space dominance.   
Sir, the Defence Space Agency that we have today, is an important first step, 
but it remains transitional.  It functions with in the existing tri-services structure and is 
headed by officers on rotation and do es not yet possess an independent cadre, a 
permanent doctrine authority or full unity  of command over space operations. Our 
dependence on space is accelerating.  With Phase-III surveillance systems and 
dozens of military satellites planned, pr otecting our space assets will soon require 
continuous dedicated military operations.  
Sir, space warfare is fundam entally different. It demands specialized doctrine, 
dedicated career officers, continuous situational awareness and seamless 
coordination with ISRO and industry. Overstretched tradit ional commands cannot 
manage this indefinitely. Therefore, Sir, I request the Government to constitute a 
high-level committee to examine options for an independent Space Force and Space 
Warfare Academy and submit recommendations  at the earliest.  We can wait for the 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
25

first silent war to disable our economy or we can ensure that no  such war is ever 
fought.  Sir, we need this force not to win a war in the stars, but rather we need it, so 
that we never lose one on the ground. Thank you.                                                   
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Ku mar: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Maharaja 
Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), Shri Sat Pa ul Sharma (Jammu and Kashmir),      
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Harsh Va rdhan Shringla (Nominated), Dr. Sumer 
Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Ma dan Rathore (Rajasthan), Shri Satnam 
Singh Sandhu (Nominated), Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mamata Mohanta (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra) and Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar).      
Now, Shri Pramod Tiwari. 
Demand for restoration of full functionality of AIIMS Raebareli, Uttar Pradesh and 
addressing acute shortage of staff, bed capacity and residential facilities 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका आभारी हूं िक एक बहुत ही मानवीय 
ĢÌन पर आपने मुझे अपनी बात रखने का मौका िदया। यह सीधे नेता सदन से जुड़ा हुआ है और मȅ 
नेता सदन का ध्यान इस पर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं।  सर, 8 अक्टूबर, 2013 मȂ Ǜीमती सोिनया 
गांधी जी, जब रायबरेली से सांसद थीं, तब यूपीए चेयरपसर्न क े तौर पर यूपीए2 मȂ उन्हȗने 
रायबरेली मȂ एÇस की आधािशला रख
ी थी।  मȅ इस संदभर् मȂ आपसे दो बार िमल भी चुका हूं। आज 
12 साल से ज्यादा का समय बीत जाने क े बाद अब तक पूणर् क्षमता क े साथ आमजन को ÎवाÎथ्य 
सेवाएं Ģदान करने मȂ एÇस, रायबरेली सक्षम नहीं हो पाया है, जबिक यह संÎथान उǄर Ģदेश क े 
मध्यांचल क्षेतर् क े साथ-साथ िबहार और मध्य Ģदेश क े कई िहÎसȗ की बड़
ी आबादी क े िलए जीवन 
रक्षक एवं उन्नत िचिकत्सा सेवाओं का Ģमुख क ेन्दर् बनने की क्षमता रखता है।   
 महोदय, Ģारंभ मȂ उसमȂ 960 बेड्स का Ģारूप था, लेिकन अभी 610 बेड्स ही हȅ। सीिनयर 
डॉक्टसर् की संख्या मȂ भारी कमी है। मȅ बानगी देता हूं। 200 एसआरडी  डॉक्टसर् की पोÎट्स हȅ, 
जबिक 37 एसआरडी  हȅ। 200 क े अनुपात मȂ 37 हȅ।  एÇस, रायबरेली की िÎथित इसि
लए और 
अिधक िंचताजनक है, क्यȗिक उस संÎथान मȂ Ģोफे सर क े 33 पद  Îवीकृ त हȅ, लेिकन क ेवल 7 
िनयुिƪयां हȅ। राजनैितक िवǎेष की भावना से इससे ज्यादा क ु छ दुखद नहीं हो सकता, जबिक 26 
पद िरƪ पड़े हुए हȅ।  इसी Ģकार एिडशनल Ģोफे सर की 26 मȂ से क ेवल 5 िनयुिƪयां हुई हȅ। क ु ल 
िमलाकर संÎथान मȂ फ ैकÊट
ी क े 201 पद Îवीकृ त हȅ और क ेवल 85 पद िरƪ हȅ। यह शैक्षिणक और 
िचिकत्सा सेवाओं की गुणवǄा पर िनरंतर Ģितकू ल Ģभाव डाल रहा है। आज िÎथित यह है िक देश 
मȂ जब अन्य संÎथान इसके  बाद आए, वे बना िदए गए।  मȅ इसे राजनीितक िवǎेष कहूंगा, क्यȗिक 
इस संÎथान को नहीं बना
या जा रहा है। मȅ एक बार िफर कहना चाहता हूं िक 1,626 मेिडकल और 
नॉन-मेिडकल Îटाफ क े अगȂÎट 450 पद िरƪ हȅ।  1200 से अिधक कमर्चािरयȗ क े िखलाफ 174  
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

क्वाटर्र उपलÅध हȅ। 108 टाइप 2 की जगह टोटल … सबसे दुखद बात यह है िक 2026 का जो 
बजट आया है, उसमȂ इसके  िलए धन नहीं रखा गया है, इसिलए मेरी िंचता ज्यादा है।  कम से कम 
अÎपताल, िचिकत्सा और िशक्षा को राजनीित से अलग रखना चािहए। िसफर्  इसिलए िक Ǜीमती 
सोिनया गांधी जी ने एक बड़ा कदम, अच्छा कदम उठाया था …(Ëयवधान)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by t
he hon. Member, Shri Pramod Tiwari:  Shrimati Sonia Gandhi (Rajasthan), 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge (Karnataka), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Prem Chand Gupta, (B ihar), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu),        
Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Sh ri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), 
Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Ma ther Hisham (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu)  and Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh).                                       
Now, Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage. 
Concern over District Administration's obstruction in installation of statues of 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and Jagatpati Basaveshwar in Bagalkot 
Ǜी  नारायणसा क े. भांडगे ( कनार्टक): सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे बोलने का मौका िदया, 
उसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं। मȅ एक अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् और गौरव पूणर् िवषय पर आपका 
ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं।  महोदय, मेरे िजला बागलकोट मȂ हमȂ छतर्पित िशवाजी महाराज 
और जगत ज्योित महात्मा बसेÌवर महाराज की Ģितमा Îथािपत करने से रोका जा रहा है। यह 
बड़ा ही दुखद िवषय है। बागलकोट नगरपािलका ने सवर्सÇमित से ĢÎताव िकया और जगह भी 
िनधार्िरत की गई। उस जगह क े िनधार्िरत होने क े बाद तमाम एनओसी िलए गए। पीडÅÊयूडी 
िडपाटर्मȂट का, पुिलस िडपाटर्मȂट का और इलैिक्टर्क िडपाटर्मȂट का एनओसी भी िमल गया। 
महोदय, िनधार्िरत जगह पर भूिम पूजन भी संपन्
न हो चुका है। उस भूिम पूजन क े वƪ सभी जन-
Ģितिनिध, कॉपȘरेटर, नगर पािलका क े सभी सदÎय तथा आयुƪ महोदय भी उपिÎथत थे। इसके  
साथ ही िंहदू समाज क े सभी गणमान्य लोग भी उपिÎथत थे। जन सहयोग से लगभग 60 लाख 
रुपये खचर् करके  18
 फीट  ऊ ँची दो Ģितमाएँ तैयार की गई हȅ। उसी जगह पर Ģितमाओं की 
ĢितÎथापना करने क े िलए Ãलेटफॉमर् भी तैयार िक या गया है। जब हम Ģितमा Îथािपत करने क े 
िलए िनकले, तब हमȂ िजला Ģशासन ǎारा रोका गया और आज भी रोका जा रहा है। हम इसके  
िलए दो बार िजला Ģशासन से िमले, कलेक्टर महोदय से िमले और राज्यपाल महोदय से भी 
िमलकर उन्हȂ इस िवषय से अवगत कराया गया। यह Ģितमा इस क्षेतर् क े गौरव का Ģत
ीक और 
युवाओं क े िलए एक Ģेरणापुंज बनेगी। कणार्टक सरकार का यह Ģितरोध सनातन धमर् िवरोधी, िंहदू 
धमर् िवरोधी, Ǜǉा क Ȃ दर् िव रोधी  और छतर्पित िशवाजी महाराज का अपमान है।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक 19 फरवरी को छतर्पित िशवाजी 
महाराज क े जन्मोत्सव क े अवसर पर उसी Ģितमा का, उसी जगह पर अनावरण िकया जाए। मȅ 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
27

इसके  िलए आपका हÎतक्षेप और सहयोग चाहता हूँ। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ 
िक आप कणार्टक सरकार को इस िवषय मȂ त्विरत कारर्वाई करने क े िलए िदशा-िनदȃश जारी 
करवाएं।  महोदय, मȅ इसके  साथ ही अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूँ, छतर्पित िशवाज ी महाराज की 
जय।                      
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member,  Shri Narayana sa K. Bhandage:  Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh),  Shri Ratanjit Pratap  Narain Singh (Uttar Pr adesh),  Shri Rajib 
Bhattacharjee (Tripura),  Shri Amar Pal Ma urya (Uttar Pradesh),  Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leis hemba (Manipur), Shri Sadanand Mhalu 
Shet Tanavade (Goa), Shri Madan Rathor e (Rajasthan),  Shri Mayankkumar Nayak 
(Gujarat),  Shrimati Mamata  Mohanta (Odisha),  Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh (Gujarat), Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya 
Pradesh),  Dr. Bhim Singh (B ihar),  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra),    
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), and Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni (Maharashtra).   
Dr. Vikramjit Singh Sahney; not present. Dr. M. Dhanapal. 
Need for revision of Below Poverty Line (BPL) criteria and updating of the BPL List 
DR. M. DHANAPAL (Tamil Nadu): Hon. Chairman, Sir, I rise to draw the attention of 
the august House to a matter of urgent pub lic importance, that  the Government of 
India has been implementing several impo rtant social security schemes with the 
objective of ensuring protection and dignity for the most vulnerable sections of the 
society. These include the Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme, Widow 
Pension Scheme, PMAY, etc., and the A nnapurna Scheme, which provides food 
support. Eligibility under all th ese Schemes is primarily lin ked to beneficiaries being 
classified as Below Poverty Line. The BPL list, presently being used for determining 
eligibility, is based on a survey conducted ne arly 15 years ago. Since then, there have 
been significant changes in the co untry's demographic and socio-economic 
conditions. Population growth, rising co st of living, unemplo yment and livelihood 
insecurity have substantially altered the po verty profile. As a re sult, many genuinely 
deserving and vulnerable individuals are ex cluded from the existing BPL list. This 
situation has affected the effective delive ry of welfare benefits, preventing these 
crucial schemes from reaching the intended beneficiaries. Therefore, it has become 
absolutely essential to und ertake fresh and a comprehensive nationwide survey to 
reassess poverty levels and to prepare an updated BPL list reflecting present realities. 
Further, considering steep rise in prices  of basic necessities, the annual income 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

ceiling prescribed for defining the poverty line also needs to  be revised in a realistic 
manner.  
I, therefore, urge the Government to take urgent steps to conduct a fresh 
enumeration exercise and revise the povert y line criteria so that social welfare 
schemes truly benefit the poor est and deserving sections of the society. Thank you, 
Sir.                           
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Dr. M. Dhanap al:  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala) Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra). 
Dr. Sasmit Patra. 
Demand for holistic infrastructural development package for Southern Odisha 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Sir, on behalf of my party, the Biju Janata Dal and our 
hon. Leader, Shri Naveen Patnaik, I focus on three key pillars for the holistic 
infrastructural development of Southern Odisha 's districts; it can be considered as a 
package which would really improve the over all development. These three pillars are 
railways, national highways and airports. I start with the railways. For the Ganjam 
district, the Railway Wagon Technology Park  at Sitalapalli, Gopalpur to Rayagada 
new line, the Brahmapur to Sambalpur line vi a Hinjili to Aska to Phulbani and the 
modernization of Brahmapur Railway Statio n are extremely crucial. For Gajapati 
district, the Naupada to Gunupur to Theruvali second line is becoming very important. 
For Kandhamal district, the Brahmapur to Sambalpur line going through Phulbani and 
the Khurda to Bolangir line that has been languishing for years ne ed to be stabilized 
and expedited primarily through the Kand hamal belt. For Rayagada district, the 
Gunupur to Theruvali new line and the Vizianagaram to Titlagarh third line are required 
and is necessary now.For Koraput district, the Jeypore to Nabarangpur, Jeypore to 
Malkangiri, and the Kottavalasa-Koraput do ubling are equally important. I come to 
Nabarangpur district, a very important distri ct of Southern Odisha .  The Junagarh to 
Nabarangpur and the Jeypore-Nabarangpur lines are crucial; that are delayed. 
Further, for Malkangiri district, the Jeyp ore to Malkangiri and Malkangiri to 
Pandurangapuram lines are necessary and the work is yet to start.  
Hon. Chairman, Sir, I come to the second pillar -- National Highways. In 
Ganjam district, the four-laning of the National Highway-157, starting from 
Brahmapur to Phulbani to Boudh to Sambalpur is very crucial.  It is still very narrow 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
29

and it has to be four-lane. Sir, from Brahmapur to Korapu t, the Highway is extremely 
important and that work is yet to be expedited. In Gajapati, the Vijayawada to Ranchi 
Economic Corridor is important for the tr ibal community is staying there. In 
Kandhamal, the widening of National Highway-157 ghat sections at Kalinga, 
Phulbani, and Ranipathar is important. Ma ny precious lives are lost because of 
accidents regularly. In Rayagada, the Vijayawada to Ranchi corridor stretch and the 
Palasa to Paralakhemundi to  Rayagada to Bhawanipatna  road will be the corridor 
from the East Coast right up to the Western part of Odisha.  
Then, I come to Koraput, National Highway-26, Borigumma to Jeypore, and 
the Jeypore-Kotpad bypasses are delayed. Work needs to expedite. I come to 
Nabarangpur. The Nabarangpur-Koksara is  delayed, and, in Malkangiri, the 
Malkangiri to Motu corridor is delayed. It has to be expedited. The last seven 
seconds, Sir. The Rangeilunda-Brahmapur Airport needs to be expedited.  I hope the 
Government will take action. Thank you, Sir.            
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra:  Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala),         
Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Gi rirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Muzibulla Khan 
(Odisha), Shri Debashish Samantaray (Odisha) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).  
Dr. John Brittas.  
Demand for exemption from mandatory TET for in-service teachers appointed prior to 
the RTE Act, 2009 and prospective application of TET norms 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Thank you very much, Sir, for giving me this 
opportunity.  Sir, this is to bring an impo rtant matter to the attention of this august 
House. There is a mounting nationwide  concern regarding the retrospective 
implementation of the Teacher’s Eligibility Test criteria, which will adversely affect tens 
of thousands of in-service school teachers appointed prior to RTE Act, 2009. I will just 
give the details in a nutshell.  
Sir, the Supreme Court, in 2025, adjudi cated, by interpreting Section 23 of 
RTE Act, that TET, that is, Eligibilit y Test, constitutes a mandatory minimum 
qualification not only for the fresh recruits , but also for those teachers who have been 
appointed prior; that means, giving a retrospective effect to it. Sir, this has created so 
much of havoc. Now, the Supreme Court also said that if at all, they don't pass the 
TET, they would be asked to retire in a compulsory mode. Sir, teachers with less than 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

five years of remaining service were granted li mited relief, but this is only limited. They 
would be ineligible for promotion.  
Sir, I do accept any standards that are being brought in to enhance the quality 
of education, but interpreting a Section and ma king it retrospective is not fair. That is 
not fair, Sir. It is going to affect thousa nds and thousands of teachers in this country. 
You already know the plight of the school education in this country. In Government 
sector alone, in the last three-four years, 18,727 schools were closed down, mostly in 
States like Bihar, UP, Himachal, etc. Sir, if you look at the vacancies that exist in the 
education front, do you know what is the number of vacancies? It is 3,57,862, as per 
the unified district information system, which is maintained by the Government of 
India, and can I tell you that out of thes e vacancies, 1,93,000 vacancies exist in Uttar 
Pradesh alone. Please understand it, Sir.   My concern is that we need to make sure 
that this Section shouldn't be applied on a retrospective manner. There are instances 
when the Supreme Court interpreted legislat ions in such a manner where either the 
Government will clarify or will come with a draft legislation, which would be debated in 
this House. I urge upon the Government to make sure that the teachers are given 
justice. Thank you, Sir.      
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated  themselves with the matter raised 
by the hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas: Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya (West Bengal), 
Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Ms. Swati Maliwal, (NCT Delhi), Shrimati Rajathi (Tamil Nadu), 
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri R.Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), and Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala).  
Shri A.D. Singh; not present …(Interruptions)… Now, the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition. Please do not raise anything concerned with the other House. And, 
please, do not raise the same point. You may raise a new point. 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MA LLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, I am only 
raising a point concerned with the Constitu tion. As I have already pointed out, our 
House and the Lok Sabha, both constitu te the Parliament. The Constitution 
recognizes these two Houses. We have to  run the House according to the rules, 
procedures and the constitutional framework. Therefore, I would request you that to 
run the House properly, we need to follow certain rules.  That is what I said.*   
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
31

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no! This will not go on r ecord.  We will not be able to discuss 
anything about the other House. That cannot be taken into account. 
…(Interruptions)…  I have already mentione d Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru’s quote and what 
he has said about that.  So, I am not allowing anything. We are now moving to the 
Question Hour.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
 
 12.00 Noon 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
Capital expenditure performance and clean energy investments in coal PSUs  
*91.    DR. K. LAXMAN: Will the Minister of COAL be pleased to state: 
(a)   the details of the reported increas e in capital expenditure by Coal India 
Limited, Singareni Collieries Comp any Limited (SCCL) and NLC India 
Limited during the first quarter of Financial Year 2025–26; 
(b)  the sector-wise allocation of this expenditure, including investments in 
renewable energy, coal gasification and employee welfare; and 
(c)   the specific projects, employment generation and infrastructure benefits 
accruing to the State of Telangana, particularly through SCCL and the 
manner in which these investments supp ort energy security and the clean 
energy transition?   
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS  (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
  
(a)  Details of capital expenditure by Coal India Limited (CIL), Singareni 
Collieries Company Limited (S CCL) and NLC India Limited  during the first quarter of 
Financial Year 2025–26: 
 
                                                                           
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

   (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
DETAILS OF CAPEX EXPENDITURE 
Name of the Company 
Q1  
2025-26 
Q1 
 2024-25 
Coal India Limited 2914.31 3331.44 
NLC India Limited 1925.62 1204.95 
SCCL   330.52   221.97 
Total 5170.45 4758.36 
  
(b) The sector-wise allocation including in renewable energy, coal gasification 
and employee welfare for FY 2025-26: - 
                                                                 (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
Head CIL NLCIL SCCL 
Renewable Energy 956.67 1950 250 
Coal gasification 300 - -- 
Employee Welfare (Buildings including Water 
Supply, Colony Roads, Culverts etc) 
990.58 26.83 160 
FMC, Railway Sidings 5621.93 227.32 50 
Mining projects including lands, building, furniture 
and others 
7630.82 1139.99 1060 
Thermal power plants 500 1734.17 180 
Total 16000 5078.31 1700 
  
  
(c) Out of allocation of Rs. 1700 Cror e for CAPEX by Singareni Collieries 
Company Limited, Rs. 1270 Crore has been allocated for existing and new mining 
projects (comprising of Plant and machinery, mine develo pment works, construction 
of buildings, land acquisition, forest land diversion, railway sidings, etc.) & Rs. 430 
Cr has been allocated to clean energy in itiatives like Solar Po wer projects and Flue 
Gas Desulfurization (FGD) installations. These ongoing mining and clean energy 
generation initiatives/projects have given a positive impetus towards ensuring energy 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
33

security along with creating significant dir ect & indirect employment opportunities in 
the State of Telangana. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: First supplementary, Dr. K. Laxman. 
DR. K. LAXMAN: Sir, under the visionary le adership of our beloved Prime Minister, 
Shri Narendra Modi, the coal sector and pu blic sector undertaki ngs have recorded a 
moment of strong capital investments. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You cannot disturb the House like this. Ãलीज़, आप  
बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... खरगे जी, Ãलीज़ बैिठए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
DR. K. LAXMAN:  Sir, during the first quarter of financial year 2025-26, PSUs together 
achieved about 114 per cent of their targeted capital expenditure, reflecting timely and 
effective execution. …(Interruptions)… 
Ǜी सभापित: Ãलीज़, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... We cannot discuss what has been 
discussed or what has happened in the other House.   
DR. K. LAXMAN: Through the Singereni Collieries Limited, Telangana continues to 
benefit from sustained investments, employment generation, infrastructure 
development, strengthening both regional growth and natural  
energies. …( Interruptions)… Through you, Sir, I would like the hon. Minister to state 
the specific benefits including infrastructu re development, acceleration in generation 
of employment opportunities that these Ca pex initiatives have generated in coal 
production regions like Telangana, particul arly, in enhancing local economic growth 
and supporting community well-being. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record except the questions. …( Interruptions)… I 
am respecting him more than you. …( Interruptions)… Don’t try to teach the Chair. I 
know it. I respect him more than you respec t him. I have always respected him. Hon. 
Minister, please. 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir,  capital expenditure, at any given point of time, in 
any particular sector, including the country overall, is a very good indicator of the kind 
of progress that is being made. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You cannot question the ruling of the Chair. …( Interruptions)…  No, 
I will not allow you. I am not allowing you to discuss the same thing. …(Interruptions)… 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I would like to reiterate what the hon. member has 
said, insofar as the coal sector is concerne d. The capital expendit ure incurred by the 
three public sector coal units has always succeeded in exceeding their targets. Last 
year, it was about 140 per cent more than the targeted amount. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing would go on record except the Minister’s answer.  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, the issue today is that apart from the Rs. 31,662 
crore of capital expenditure that has been incurred in fiscal year 2024-25, we should 
see that it has gone up from 2020-21, when it  was Rs. 17,500 crore. It has gone up to 
Rs. 31,662 crore in these two years. In addition, the country has witnessed record 
production of coal. It has crossed one billion tons of coal production the last time. It 
has gone up from 500 million tons to over 1,000 million tons. This has resulted in 
reduction of imports. …( Interruptions)… Sir, apart from the capital expenditure 
incurred by the PSUs in the coal sector, I woul d also like to add  that  the   budget 
which was presented by the hon. Finance Minister indicated a massive increase in 
capital expenditure for the country overall.                                          
Sir, in 2014, the country's Budget provid ed for something like Rs.2 lakh crores 
by way of capital expenditure. …(Interruptio ns)… Last year, it had gone up to Rs.11 
lakh crores and some people like me used  to wonder whether we will be able to 
absorb and spend Rs.11 lakh crores. …( Interruptions)… This year the capital 
expenditure has gone up to Rs.12 lakh crores . Adding to that, what is made available 
to the States, through the Finance Commi ssion, is another Rs.4.5 lakh crores, 
amounting to something like Rs.17 lakh cr ores. …(Interruptions)… Then you add the 
sectoral capex by the PSUs, you have Rs. 31,662 crores by the coal PSUs.  In my 
own sector, the oil sector, our PSUs are called Oil Marketing  
Companies. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You should maintain disciplin e in the House, only then, I will allow 
you. …(Interruptions)… You don't have the discipline.  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: They are also in vesting Rs.1.20 lakh crores by way of 
capital. …(Interruptions)… So, it is a massive  amount of capital expenditure which is 
being incurred in the country. …(Interruptions )… This has sustained over-achievement 
from targets, despite coal sector being marred with various bottlenecks, and made 
the coal sector PSUs am ongst the top performing PSUs in the country.  
…(Interruptions)… In so far as the State of Telangana is concerned, one of the 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
35

companies there, which is a PSU, is incurring Rs. 2,150 crores a year by way of 
capital expenditure. …(Interruptions)…  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please go back to your seats. …( Interruptions)… Hon.  Minister, 
please continue.  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: This results in  both direct and indirect employment. 
Whenever capital expenditure is  incurred, no matter in whic h sector, infrastructure is 
built, modernisation takes place, jobs are created directly and indirectly. 
…(Interruptions)… In case of the facility in Telangan a, if I remember correctly, they are 
employing 40,236 people directly  and  anot her  26,442  or so by way of contract 
workers. So, it is direct and indirect employment …(Interruptions)… In capital 
expenditure, you used cement, steel, etc. So, the production goes up and 
employment there goes up. …(Interruptions)… All in all, I can say that overall in the 
country, you can see, apart from the Cent ral Government's allocation of capital 
expenditure, which has gone up to Rs.12.2 la kh crores, what is going to the States 
through the Finance Commission is another Rs.4.5 lakh crores and what is being 
incurred by the companies in the coal sector  is Rs.31,662 crores. …(Interruptions)… I 
would also like to add, 18 per cent of the coal production in the country is in the 
private  sector. They are also incurring CAPE X. …(Interruptions)… So, it is a situation 
in which the capital expenditure is contribu ting to the overall economic activity in the 
State, and also in the country, and this  has resulted in mining expansion and 
mechanisation, last mile connectivity, ra ilway sidings and logistics, thermal power 
capacity, renewable energy and coal gasifi cation. …(Interruptions)… What is most 
important in a sector like coal is that  it also helps in employee welfare and 
infrastructure. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary;  Dr. K. Laxman. 
DR. K. LAXMAN: Sir, my second suppleme ntary is very specific and pertinent. I 
would like to know whether the investment in renewable energy by coal PSUs indicate 
a structured transition strategy rather than ad hoc diversification. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nobody can force the Chair. …(Interruptions)… Nobody has the 
right to force the Chair.  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I think, that is a very relevant question which the 
hon. Member has asked and I think the answer is also very clear. ...(Interruptions)... 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record except hon. Minister’s  
reply. ...(Interruptions)... 
(At this stage some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: In a sector like coal, one has to ensure both safety, the 
cleaning of the current processes, last mile connectivity and also transition. It is a very 
relevant question he has asked. In the dive rsification into renewable energy, the coal 
PSUs have already installed about 2 gigawatts of renewable energy capacity and have 
a strong pipeline of about 22 gigawatts acro ss solar, wind and hybrid projects. The 
NLCIL, Neyveli Lignite, leads with 1.8 giga watts installed renewable capacity, over 2 
gigawatts under implementation and a long-t erm plan of 10 gigawatts by 2030. Also, 
NLCIL, that is Neyveli Lignite, is the fi rst PSU to cross 1 gigawatt and has achieved 
next zero. Also, the same company is developing a 250 or 500 MWh battery energy 
storage system. I could go on giving the contribution that the co al sector companies 
are doing for energy diversification but, I th ink, this is captured and it is leading to 
transition.  Clearly, in a country, which is on  the move, if you look at the sustainability 
transition, when the hon. Prime Minister assumed responsibility in May 2014, we were 
only blending 1.4 per cent of bio-fuels. Today , it has come to 20 per cent bio-fuels. If 
you look at the area of green hydrogen, we  have a target of 5 million tons by 2030, 
and I believe even that will be met.  
So, the question that the hon. Member has asked and the details I have given 
about the green energy, or rath er this diversification into renewable energy, these are 
all very valid. I personally feel there was a debate when you said, “close down coal, 
close down fossil fuel”. There was an international thing that we should move straight 
to renewable energy sources, but to move from the current situation to renewable 
energy, it must be available,. And I have se en global estimates, whether it is in the 
International Energy Agency or the BP Ou tlook, they say that our coal demand is 
going to increase in the next few years. In fact, it is saying that by 2030 or so, it 
should go up by 17 per cent.  So, simultaneously while we  are cleaning the processes 
in coal, simultaneously whilst we are prod ucing more, saving our foreign exchange, 
we are also doing green energy movement in to solar energy. There is also a lot of 
work being done on coal gas gasification,  coal-bed methane and the other areas.  
Thank you, Sir. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee.  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
37

डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
जानना चाहता हूं िक what  the Capital Expenditure Pe rformance of the coal PSUs over 
recent years is and how the Ministry of Co al stands in comparison with other 
Ministries in terms of CAPEX achievements. 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, in so far as the Coal Mini stry is concerned, with all 
humility, I say that I am standing in for my colleague, Shri G. Kishan Reddy, who 
could not be here today. I wa nt to pay him a compliment that in relation to the other 
Ministries, the Coal Ministry has done very well. It has incurred Rs.31,662 crores of 
Capital Expenditure, which is very good. Bu t, with all modesty at my command, the 
coal sector is very different from others . So, I should not compare that with the 
Capital Expenditure of the Ministry of Petr oleum and Natural Gas, the Ministry with 
which I am associated. Ours is higher. It is about four times - Rs.1,20,000 crores. 
But, our operations are much larger, and I think it is very creditable for the Coal 
Ministry to have Rs. 31,662 crores  as Capital Expenditure  and  it is visible. It is visible 
in the last mile connectivity. It is visible in  the railway processing. It is visible in the 
solar energy transition that their comp anies are making. Th ere are only three 
companies, as far as I know, and all three of them are doing very well on Capital 
Expenditure.  And, to answer the hon. Me mber’s question, I would say that they are 
doing very well in comparison to other public sector companies which are under 
different Ministries.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary, Shri Brij Lal.  
S H R I  B R I J  L A L :  S i r ,  m y  q u e s t i o n  t o  t h e  h on. Minister is whether the investment in 
renewable energy by coal PSUs indicates a structured transition strategy rather than 
an ad hoc diversification. 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, it is a structured strategy. What invariably happens 
is that all the PSUs, the ones I am familia r with, which are dealing with the energy 
sector, they declare a date for net zero. The companies, with which I am more familiar 
like the oil-marketing companies, have a ne t zero target by 2040 or 2045. So, when  
you adopt a strategy, it has to lead in that direction, that you start a process now. I 
know in the coal sector, some of those net zero targets are a little closer. They are in 
2030.  So, if you look at the overall figure s, they may appear small now. But, if you 
look at the solar energy supply chain, it  also is very cumbersome. So, I am very 
confident. One, I can be very sure that it is a consciously-thought through strategy. It 
is not something that is done ad hoc. If there is a strategy to become Net Zero by a 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

particular year …( Interruptions)… No! 2070 is a national target. My senior colleague, 
Manohar Lal ji, has just reminded me. It is to tally correct. Sir, we set a national target 
o f N et  Z er o  b y 2 07 0 .  W h en  t h e h o n .  Pri me M i n i s t er w en t  t o  G las g o w ,  I  th i n k ,  i t  is 
around that time when we made the five co mmitments. 2070, people said, is too far. 
India is a country, which has great develo pmental challenges and which has been 
traditionally dependent on different fossil fuel s, etc. Sir, when I was associated with 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, our daily consumption of crude oil was 5 
million barrels a day. Today, it is 5.6 million barrels. As we go forward, it will go up to 
6 and 6.5 million barrels. Similarly, if ou r companies like ONGC, IOCL declare the 
target of 2040, it is very bold target. Ev en in the coal sector, these are very bold 
targets. It may appear that the start is a li ttle slow, but it is a structured strategy, and 
as we go along and clear the cobwebs, this  diversification or movement into clean 
energy will be cleaned up. All of them have  always been very conscious. Even if a 
company is located in Telangana, it is not that it is doing CAPEX in Telangana and 
providing jobs. It is 2,150 crores of rupe es. But this company is also doing solar 
projects in the rest of the country. Thank you, sir. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fifth supplementary, Ms. Dola Sen. 
MS. DOLA SEN: Sir, through you, I want to comm unicate to the Union Government 
Treasury Benches that coal is our national asset.  But as per the policy decision, the 
Government is badly trying to disinvest an d privatize the coal sector and the coal 
PSUs by any means. I want to ask whether it is atmanirbharta at all where our national 
assets are being sold to corporates and even the foreign companies. Sir, it is affecting 
the nationalized coal industry, coal PSUs and the workers as well. How much capital 
expenditure and clean energy investments you do for coal PSUs do not matter. Thank 
you, Sir.  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I am very intrigued when I have a question, which 
is both a question and which also has an answer in the tail.  Here also, in the end, it 
was said, “How much capital expenditure you do does not matter ”. But, let me 
respond to some other aspects to which my  hon. colleague and friend has referred 
to. Hon. Member said, national assets ar e being sold to corporates! No, no. One 
minute, one minute; let us slow down. If there are three PSUs, namely, Coal India 
Limited, Singareni Collieries Company Limited or the Neyveli Lignite Corporation India 
Limited, are these foreign corporate assets ? Sir, these are owned by our own people 
and they are the ones who are heading these. Insofar as the coal sector is concerned, 
with my little education in the last two days, I must say that it is not just the coal PSUs 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
39

which are doing these works. There are also private sector people who are 
contributing. There are about 86 private projects which are going on. 
Sir, in these nine years of having been in the hon. Prime Minister's team or in 
the 39 years as civil servant, I do not recall of any privatisation of the coal PSUs.  So, I 
don't know what the hon. Member is talkin g about that we are selling the assets of 
the coal PSUs to corporate interests. Yes, a li ttle bit of illegal mining, not little, quite a 
lot of illegal mining takes place. Sir, la nd is a State Subject but because of the 
inherently dangerous nature of coal mining, which is be low ground, etc., Centre's 
clearance is required. So, with my limit ed knowledge of the sector, I want to 
categorically state that the Central Governme nt has not sold any assets to corporate 
entities. I do not recall and I do not think that  there has ever been privatization of coal 
PSUs, etc., and the three of them, CIL, S CCL etc., have all been working and their 
capital expenditure targets have gone up.  In  one case, last year, Sir, it had gone up 
by 143 per cent over the existing target, an d I also gave the figures in reply to an 
earlier supplementary, how it has increased from the figures of 2022-23, etc. So, I 
think, it is a happy story in the coal sector. Hon. Member referred to coal as a national 
asset. If you are an environmentalist, you should say that we should slowly use our 
coal, produce more. This we are doing. We  are importing less. We are saving 60,000 
crores of rupees, I think, on foreign ex change because of reduced imports. Today, 
we are in a happy situation. We are also making the transition to solar energy and 
other cleaner forms of energy.     
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Q. No. 92. Shriman Rajinder Gupta; not there. 
Supplementaries! 
*92.  [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Strategic petroleum reserves utilisation framework 
*92.  SHRI RAJINDER GUPTA: Will the Minister of PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
be pleased to state: 
 (a)   the current storage capacity of In dia’s strategic petroleum reserves and the 
percentage of capacity presently filled; 
(b)    the average procurement cost of crude oil stored therein; 
(c)    whether any drawdo wn simulations or stress tests have been conducted 
during the last three years and if so, the details thereof; 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(d)   the criteria prescribed for deployment  of reserves during price volatility or 
supply disruptions; and  
(e)    whether any expansion plan has b een formulated and if so, the estimated 
fiscal implications thereof? 
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI): (a) to (e) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
Statement 
(a)   Government, through a Special Pu rpose Vehicle called Indian Strategic 
Petroleum Reserve Limited (I SPRL), have established Stra tegic Petroleum Reserves 
(SPR) facilities with total capacity of 5.33 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) of crude oil at 
3 locations in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.  Quantity of the crude available in the 
caverns varies depending on market cond itions. Currently, ISPRL has around 4.094 
MMT of crude stock available which is around 77 % of the total storage capacity. Out 
of total storage capacity, 50% is utilized for commercial activities by ISPRL. 
(b)   Since the first purchase of crude oil for filling the reserves in 2015, crude 
oil prices (Indian basket) have fluctuated  from a high of US $ 80.08 per barrel in 
October 2018 to a low of US$ 19.90 per barre l in April 2020 during the COVID period 
to as high as US$ 112.87 per barrel in Ma rch 2022. Taking advantage of low crude oil 
prices in April/May 2020, Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR) were filled to full 
capacity, leading to notional savings of a pproximately INR 5,000 crore. The weighted 
average procurement cost of crude oil f illed in SPRs from Government Budgetary 
Support is still half of the currently prevailing crude oil prices. 
(c)    To check the preparedness of running and standby equipment, fluidity of 
crude oil and readiness for drawdown, monthly circulation of crude oil is being done 
by ISPRL on regular basis for all caverns at all locations. India also takes part in the 
Emergency Response Exercises (ERE) conducted by IEA. 
(d)   An Inter-Ministerial Empowe red Committee of Secretaries takes 
decisions in respect of use of strategic crude oil in the event of an emergency. 
(e)    In July 2021, Government had al so approved the establishment of two 
additional commercial-cum-strategic petrol eum reserve facilities with total storage 
capacity of 6.5 MMT in Odisha and Karnatak a, on a Public Private Partnership mode 
at a total project cost of Rs. 14,527 cr ores with the Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
41

capped at 60% of the total project cost. Assessment of new sites for establishing 
additional crude oil reserves is a continuous process.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade. 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े: सभापित महोदय, देश की ऊजार् सुरक्षा को मजबूत करने और 
आम नागिरकȗ को अंतरराÍटर्ीय बाजार मȂ कच्चे तेल की कीमत मȂ होने वाले उतार-चढ़ाव से 
बचाने क े िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार राÍटर्िहत मȂ लगातार 
ठोस िनणर्य ले रही है। सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह पूछना चाहता हूँ िक क्या सरकार ने कच्चे 
तेल क े रणनीितक भंडारण की तरह भिवÍय मȂ दर्व ीकृ त पेटर्ोिलयम गैस, िजसे एलपीजी कहते हȅ, 
उसके  िलए रणनीितक या बफर भंडारण की ËयवÎथा िवकिसत करने का कोई िनणर्य िलया है या 
ऐसा कोई ĢÎताव िवचाराधीन है? क्या रणनीितक पेटर्ोिलयम भंडारȗ का उपयोग अंतरराÍटर्ीय 
कच्चे तेल की कीमतȗ मȂ उतार-चढ़ाव क े Ģभाव को कम करने क े िलए िकया जा रहा है? यिद हाँ, 
तो आम उपभोƪाओं क े िहत
ȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए एलपीजी, पेटर्ोल और डीजल की कीमतȗ को 
िनयंतर्ण मȂ रखने क े िलए माननीय मंतर्ी जी और मंतर्ालय ǎ ारा वतर्मान मȂ कौन-कौन से ठोस और 
दीघर्कािलक कदम उठाए जा रहे हȅ?  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister. 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :  Sir, this specific question, Starred Question, priority 
two, is on the issue of our strategic petr oleum reserves. For any country, particularly 
a large country like India and a country whic h is growing at a phenomenal pace, -- 
during one quarter the economic growth wa s 8.2 per cent and during the previous 
quarter, it was 7.8 per cent -- there must be very secure  reserves. According to the 
IMF, which has enhanced our expected rate  of economic growth from 6.6 per cent to 
7.3 per cent, the country must have a very viable and secure reserve so that in case 
of global turbulence, we should not be fo und in a vulnerable situation. Fortunately, 
Sir, India has a vast coastline, both on  the west and the east. We have several 
refineries on the west coast. Starting wi th Nayara and RIL in Jamnagar, we have 
refineries in Mumbai, Mangalore and Kochi on the western coast. We have Chennai, 
Tatipaka, Vizag, Paradip, Barauni, Haldia on the eastern coast. Sir, according to the 
International Energy Agency, vast coastlin e, today we are the world’s third largest 
consumer of crude oil.  We have the world' s fourth largest refining capacity, currently 
around 260 million metric tons per annum, going on to 320 million metric tons per 
annum, and we are also the world's fifth larg est exporter of petroleum product. Now, 
the strategic petroleum reserve is design ed to ensure that in case of global 
turbulence, in case supplies cannot reach either from the western coast or the 
eastern coast, we must have enough stock left in order to meet that situation. Now, 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

fortunately for India, we are also a domest ic producer. When I say, we are the fifth 
largest exporter, God forbid if there was to  be an eventuality where no supplies are 
reaching, we would obviously not then ex port. We would also utilize our domestic 
production for domestic consumption. Sir, the International Energy Agency stipulates 
that there should be about 90 days of hold ing as a strategic petroleum reserve. But I 
also want to point out that these are the estimates largely relevant -- I am choosing 
my words carefully; I am not saying they are not relevant for others -- for OECD 
countries and on smaller OECD countries. When there was a global crisis and there 
was total volatility, the IEA, the Intern ational Energy Agency , based in Paris, 
stipulated that countries which had large reserves, they should release some in order 
to stabilize the global price. Sir, which are the countries which release stocks in 
differing quantities from their stocks? One was the United States; the other was India; 
the third was China and the fourth, if I recal l correctly, was Japan. So, we were in a 
happy situation and we were able to rise to the situation. Today, Sir, we calculate not 
just what is in the caverns as our reserv es, and these are in three places. I cannot go 
into precise details, although some people speculate. They are in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh, the State of Karnataka and the third one, which we are hoping to get started 
soon, in the State of Odisha. If you look at  the reserves in the caverns, the reserves 
held by us in our refineries, the reserves on  floating platforms at our ports, all these 
put together and our products, it comes to 74 days. Ideally, it should be 90. As the 
line Minister, I think, at least, it is safe with something like 74 days and going forward, 
we can even consider raising it. Sir, the ho n. Member also raised the issue of price 
volatility. This particular question relates to the period between 2015 and 2022.  The 
period between 2015 and 2022 includes pre- COVID period and COVID period till 2022 
when COVID was mercifully on its way out. We filled the current stock at that time 
from 2015 to 2022 at prices which I may say,  -- normally we do not discuss the price 
at which we buy oil – is roughly 50 percent of the prevailing price today. This is very 
creditable. We bought it at 50 per cent of the current price. If we were to buy crude at 
a certain price and then its price dropped, you would say that we made a mistake and 
that we should have waited to buy. So, th ere is always a balance involved. I am very 
happy to inform this House through you, Sir, that we have been able to weather the 
international turbulence. Than ks to the farsighted and vi sionary policies of the hon. 
Prime Minister, we have been able to ensure availability, affordability and sustainability 
which is the trilemma of energy. Today, a reference was made in the question to 
liquefied petroleum gas. Our production is going up. We are also signing international 
arrangements. The President of the UAE was here recently. We signed another deal 
with them. We are importing about $9 billio n worth of natural gas from them. We are 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
43

importing from Qatar and also from other countries. Liquefied petroleum gas is filled in 
cylinder which is a product of refinery. We have also signed an  agreement with the 
United States for buying ten per cent of our requirements from them. Overall, the 
strategic petroleum reserves are a very  important component in our economic 
security. Economic security means that a democratically elected Government and the 
Prime Minister feels particularly responsible to the common man.  For the aam aadmi, 
the prices should be at the lowest level. They are lower today than in most parts of the 
world. In fact, in 2014, we had 14 crore cooking gas connections. It has gone up to 33 
crore connections. If there are four people in a family, we have vi rtually saturated the 
country. In addition to that, that is being supplied to Ujjwala beneficiaries for as little 
as five rupees in a day. And if the beneficiary is not an Ujjwala beneficiary, he or she is 
also getting in his or her kitchen for as li ttle as 13-14 rupees per day. This is a very 
reasonable price. Our oil marketing compan ies incurred a loss in doing that, but we 
compensated them and with the God's grace, they  are all doing well. All in all, this is 
a very important component of our energy security, the strategic petroleum reserves, 
and it has worked very well. The 74 days of stockholding that we do, we just do not 
keep it there. Fifty per cent of it is also ava ilable for trading.  And if there were to be a 
requirement, the Government of India would ha ve the first claim on it. If you keep too 
much of stuff in your godown or basement , then, it seems unproductive. We use 50 
per cent of this to supply for the country's needs and for trading. Thank you, sir.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary, Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha.  
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA: Thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity 
to raise a supplementary question. The recent discovery of natu ral gas reserves in 
Andaman offshore area has generated exp ectation of strengthening of domestic 
production. In this context, I would like to  ask the hon. Minister, through you, Sir, 
whether any timeline has been set for the full appraisal of these reserves to be brought 
into production, so that the development process can be commenced with the aim of 
reducing import dependence from other countries. Thank you, Sir.                            
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI : Sir, I want to thank the hon. Member for asking this 
question. Whenever the Minister of Pe troleum and Natural Gas appears for an 
examination, he is hoping that this question  is asked because it also provides us an 
opportunity. But, before I go to the discoveries of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
or the Krishna-Godavari Basin or the Mumbai High, I just want to make a few 
comments by way of an introduction. Sir, petroleum and natural gas exploration and 
production is, by definition, a long-term proc ess. It has a big gestation period and it 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

is heavily capital intensive. In the years between 2006 and 2014, when another 
Government was in office, no work was done on exploration and production. We 
were in an unhappy situation that people used to give us pious homilies and preach, 
“Why do you want to do E&P? There is en ough gas and oil available in the global 
market. It is cheaper to buy.”   I don't like to use language like this, but it is very, very 
clear that these were people representing some other interests. They did not have the 
national interest at hear t. So, when Modiji, the ho n. Prime Minister, assumed 
responsibility in the year 2014, he change d it. From 2016, the dead decade came to 
an end and we started changing our polic y. We went from Production Sharing 
Agreements to Revenue Sh aring Agreements. To give an example to the hon. 
Member, in Guyana, which is one of the bigges t finds of oil and gas in the world, they 
dug 46 wells. 46 wells! Each one costs more  than 100 million or a thousand crore. It 
was on the 47th well that they found it and then the history changes. So, insofar as the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands are concerned,  I just want to say the geographical 
location is such it comes from Indonesia,  right where Myanmar is and then comes 
down. We have dug three or four wells there. Each time we have dug, we have found 
oil or gas; we have sent it for seismic study. So, we have to go on doing this. We did 
it 17 kilometres to the West of the Andama n Islands, we found oil and gas. We did it 
18 kilometers to the East, we found oil and ga s. But the trick or rather the challenge is 
to find where the vertical linkages are, so that you can find the point at which you get 
the maximum economic results. This is all very expensive process, but I can share 
with you that the hon. Prime Minister launched – it is well known – the Samudra 
Manthan Programme, which wa s announced by him. All the deep-water wells 
spudded in A&N Islands by ONGC and OI L have been successful except that we 
need to do more to find out a really big thing because very high cost is involved. If you 
spend a lot of money and go into one spot, you will find that maybe, the economics 
were not worth it. This area is rich and we may find that. In fact, my Ministry did a 
review and made a presentation before th e hon. Prime Minister. It was not only 
because of the Samudra Manthan programme announced by him, but his instructions 
to us are very clear. This is in  national interest. ‘Go ahead. 125 क ु एं खोिदए and go 
ahead every year’. So, we are going to increase the number no matter what the cost 
is. Thanks to the Samudra Manthan Progr amme, the budgetary outlays and our own 
Oil Companies, which are in the upstream, will also put their resources. It is very 
positive except that every time they do so mething, they have to report it to the 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbon and also  to the Stock Market. This is a process 
which will go on.  Meanwhile, we are doin g well in the Krishna-Godavari Basin. I 
think, the gas per day has gone up. It is 55 ,000 barrels of oil per day; gas has also 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
45

gone up. In the Mumbai High, there is a reju venation of ONGC facility, which was, I 
think, of 1976 or so. BP is trying to revive there. They are also very positive. So, it is a 
positive outlook scenario in total terms.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fifth supplementary; Shri Mayankkumar Nayak. 
Ǜी मंयककु मार नायक: सभापित महोदय, पेटर्ोिलयम भंडारȗ का जो ĢÌन है, उसके  साथ 
मेहसाणा, गुजरात मȂ ओएनजीसी मȂ िपछले कई सालȗ से onshore पर सबसे ज्यादा ऑयल 
िनकालने वाला क्षेतर् है।  पूरे उǄरी गुजरात मȂ मेहसाणा, पाटन, बनास कांठा, गांधी नगर, 
साबरकांठा, इन सभी िजलȗ मȂ सबसे ज्यादा ऑयल कर्ूड िनकलता है।  मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
यह पूछना है िक क्या सरकार ǎारा उसी क्षेतर् मȂ कोई इंडÎटर्ी, कोई िरफायनरी लगाकर, वहाँ क े 
लोगȗ को रोजगार िमले – इसके   िलए कोई योजना बनाई गई है? महोदय, वहाँ से ऑयल 
पाइपलाइन क े माध्यम से दूसरी जगह पर, िरफायरी मȂ पहुँचाया जा
ता है। यिद वहीं पर 
पाइपलाइन डाली जाएगी, तो दूसरी िरफायनरी मȂ ऑयल भेजने का जो खचर् आता है, सरकार का 
वह खचर् भी बचाया जा सक
ता है। इसके  साथ ही मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस बारे मȂ जानना चाहता हूँ 
िक पाटन, बनासकाँठा वगैरह, जो इंडिÎटर्यल डेवलपमȂट लेवल मȂ िपछड़े हुए क्षेतर् हȅ, क्या 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी का अपने मंतर्ालय क े माध्यम से उस क्षेतर् मȂ ऐसी इंडÎटर्ीज़ या िरफायनरी लगाने 
का कोई िव
चार है या ऐसी कोई सोच है?  
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I have a map of India.. …(Interruptions)… 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, please give one to Opposition also.    
MR. CHAIRMAN: Does Ms. Sen not belong to your Party? …(Interruptions)… No, 
please.  There are only three supplementaries.   
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I have a map of India in front of me which shows all 
the refineries from Bathinda, Panipat, Ma thura in the North. Barmer, Rajasthan is 
coming up. It has several in Gujarat and West  India.  About the Gu jarat refineries, if I 
may say, Nayara is about 20 million metr ic tonnes per annum. About the Reliance in 
Jamnagar, one of them is 35 million metr ic tonnes and the ot her one is 33 million 
metric tonnes. Then, you go to Mangalore, Kochi, Chennai and all over the country. A 
refinery by its very definiti on is a very big capital investment.  We already have 260 
billion metric tonnes per annum. Now, if I were the Member from Mehsana as my 
friend, I would also want it in my constituency.  But if there are several refineries in the 
area, we cannot multiply. If I were to look  at the current map, it is very evenly 
distributed and the capacity of these refineries is going up to 320 million metric tonnes 
per annum in any case throug h the autonomous processes which are there. The kind 
of plans that I hear from our industry, they , in fact, show that it will go up to 400 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

million metric tonnes per annum or even higher.  In a fe w years’ time, the global 
scenario will be characterized by only thre e or four countries which will have such 
refineries. India is already the world’s four th largest refiner and going ahead, I would 
see the small teapot -- I should not call them tin pot -- refineries in different 
countries, they will no longer be viable.  In dia will be, but that does not mean that we 
have to proliferate them, you know, too many in one area.  So, I deeply  respect   the 
s e n t i m e n t   o f   a n   M P   w h o   s a y s   t h e r e   i s   o i l    h e r e  t h e r e f o r e .   W e l l ,  o i l  c a n  b e  
extracted and processed in a refinery nearby .  So, my humble submission is, I do not 
think that area lends itself  for another refinery now b ecause we have already got 
several in the area, in Gujarat, and if you go to Western India, Mumbai, etc, we have 
there also. So, on refineries in terms of lo cation, we are fairly well situated. We are 
only going to be increasing the capacities of  some of them in order to integrate them 
for the production of petro chemicals and so on. I thank you very much, Sir.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 93. 
Houses to urban homeless and slum dwellers 
*93.     SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR: Will  the Minister of HOUSING AND URBAN 
AFFAIRS be pleased to state: 
(a) the details of schemes being run by the Central Government for provision 
of home to urban homeless; 
(b) the details of fund allocated, released  and utilized for providing home to 
urban homeless and slum dwellers during  the last three Financial Years till 
31st January, 2026, State-wise, scheme-wise and year-wise; and 
(c) the details of number of homes provid ed and slums developed during the 
last three years, State-wise, scheme-wise and year-wise? 
THE MINISTER OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (SHRI MANOHAR LAL): (a) to 
(c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
(a) to (c) ‘Land’ and ‘Colonization’ are State subjects. Therefore, all schemes 
related to housing for their citizens including homeless are implemented by 
States/Union Territories (UTs) in thei r respective areas. However, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) supplem ents the efforts of States/UTs by 
providing Central Assistance under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban (PMAY-U) 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
47

since June 25, 2015 to provide pucca hous es to all eligible urban beneficiaries 
including urban homeless and slum dwellers across the country. 
 
Based on the learnings from the experi ences of implementa tion of PMAY-U, 
MoHUA has revamped the scheme and la unched PMAY-U 2.0 ‘Housing for All’ 
Mission with effect from 01.09.2024 for implementation in urban areas across the 
country to support 1 crore additional eligible beneficiaries in next five years. PMAY-U 
2.0 is implemented through four verticals i.e., Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC), 
Affordable Housing in Part nership (AHP), Affordable Rental Housing (ARH) and 
Interest Subsidy Scheme (ISS). The Sc heme Guidelines can be accessed at 
https://pmay-urban.gov.in/uploads/guidelines/Operational-Guidelines-of-PMAY-
U-2.pdf. 
 
Based on the project proposals submitted by States/UTs, a total of 122.28 lakh 
houses, including 10.66 lakh under PMAY-U  2 . 0 ,  h a v e  b e e n  s a n c t i o n e d  b y  t h e  
Ministry, so far. Out of which, 114.84 lakh houses have been grounded and 97.02 lakh 
are completed/delivered to the benefici aries including urban homeless and slum 
dwellers across the country as on 22.01.2026 . Against the sanctioned houses, more 
than 29 lakh beneficiaries are slum dwellers. The State/UT-wise and year-wise details 
of Central Assistance sanctioned, released an d utilized during the last three years till 
31.01.2026 for the beneficiaries includin g slum dwellers, and houses sanctioned, 
completed and occupied during the last three years under PMAY-U and PMAY-U 2.0 
are at Annexure-I and Annexure-II respectively.    
 
Additionally, MoHUA supported ‘Shelters for Urban Homeless (SUH)’ under 
Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana - National  Urban Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NULM), 
through respective States/UTs. It focuses on  providing permanent shelters equipped 
with basic facilities to the urban homele ss. Under the scheme, 1,995 shelter with 
space for more than 1.41 lakh person have  been supported. State/UT-wise details of 
shelters are at Annexure-III.  
  
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Annexure-I 
State/UT-wise and year-wise details of Central Assistance sanctioned, released and utilized during the last three years and current 
year till 31.01.2026 for the beneficiaries including slum dwellers under PMAY-U and PMAY-U 2.0 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Financial Progress of Central Assistance (₹ in crore) 
Sanctioned Released* Utilised** 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Current 
Year 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Current 
Year 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Current 
Year 
1 Andhra Pradesh 2,950.7 752.2 468.8 141.8 6,098.8 5,154.6 - 244.5 6,108.9 2,957.0 1,372.6 718.7 
2 Bihar 54.9 194.9 1,500.2 803.5 227.9 597.1 169.5 1,114.4 513.9 215.2 554.9 713.2 
3 Chhattisgarh 614.4 52.7 - 364.0 698.4 483.1 177.8 129.5 457.9 642.1 299.0 80.3 
4 Goa 8.6 - - 0.1 8.6 - - 0.1 8.8 0.1 - 0.1 
5 Gujarat 3,657.7 172.4 - 637.3 3,988.0 655.8 - 517.1 4,319.0 318.3 372.0 170.2 
6 Haryana 125.8 - 228.8 35.1 125.8 199.9 - 65.5 163.2 127.5 43.9 2.5 
7 Himachal 
Pradesh 20.5 5.3 - 30.7 19.4 9.6 9.6 15.3 39.1 11.8 11.2 5.8 
8 Jharkhand 109.7 - - 212.3 311.3 158.4 1.5 226.5 356.0 272.3 250.4 46.7 
9 Karnataka 304.7 230.9 - 2.2 1,141.1 618.0 6.2 602.5 545.4 505.3 739.4 110.8 
10 Kerala 253.8 116.3 - 0.6 241.6 225.5 83.7 122.8 415.9 192.3 163.8 101.7 
11 Madhya 
Pradesh 1,311.4 142.5 - 769.8 2,740.0 1,280.3 270.3 318.7 2,461.7 1,415.7 606.7 334.9 
12 Maharashtra 3,007.9 406.7 - 1,158.2 3,851.6 1,542.9 313.6 591.0 3,850.5 1,031.6 991.3 766.1 
13 Odisha 31.0 281.5 79.6 228.2 295.4 293.4 26.5 284.0 388.1 288.6 139.9 0.3 
14 Punjab 451.7 - - 427.6 349.9 179.3 123.2 243.7 308.0 125.0 200.2 4.8 
15 Rajasthan 1,551.8 529.9 357.0 394.1 733.7 683.2 223.5 674.7 840.4 450.4 511.7 332.2 
16 Tamil Nadu 624.8 152.7 - 165.2 722.2 877.6 222.1 403.8 863.5 665.8 482.5 171.6 
17 Telangana 193.9 - 1,705.2 1.7 193.9 485.0 18.7 236.0 192.8 - 469.4 139.9 
18 Uttar Pradesh 2,061.2 2,351.5 834.4 4,029.5 2,290.3 4,451.4 1,129.9 1,521.7 3,298.1 4,004.5 1,881.3 147.6 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
49

19 Uttarakhand 200.6 44.1 - 54.5 172.7 130.8 62.1 84.5 177.0 117.5 130.5 41.2 
20 West Bengal 309.1 - - 11.6 1,138.2 945.3 515.7 727.9 560.0 743.6 898.2 1,037.9 
Sub-total (States) 17,844.1 5,433.6 5,174.0 9,468.0 25,348.8 18,971.2 3,353.9 8,124.2 25,868.4 14,084.4 10,118.9 4,926.5 
21 Arunachal 
Pradesh 0.2 - 118.8 - 0.2 14.8 5.0 35.0 4.2 - 14.8 5.0 
22 Assam 146.3 203.1 - 390.6 395.4 395.9 272.2 262.6 231.9 449.4 365.9 155.3 
23 Manipur 0.5 - - 79.3 98.8 36.0 53.7 56.7 116.3 106.7 54.2 0.0 
24 Meghalaya 0.1 - - 52.0 4.6 13.6 5.5 28.9 9.0 - 8.3 0.5 
25 Mizoram 5.0 - - 10.5 163.1 43.4 65.2 42.9 74.3 0.4 236.4 55.2 
26 Nagaland 0.0 - - - 0.0 86.4 25.0 25.0 67.8 73.1 45.9 58.4 
27 Sikkim 0.6 - - - 0.6 - - - 0.6 - - - 
28 Tripura 69.2 71.9 - 54.2 58.7 92.8 48.4 70.7 93.7 189.1 34.9 0.0 
Sub-total (NE States) 222.0 275.0 118.8 586.6 721.5 682.8 475.0 521.9 597.9 818.6 760.5 274.5 
29 A&N Islands 0.0 - - - 1.0 - - 0.8 0.0 - 0.9 0.0 
30 Chandigarh 3.2 - - 0.1 3.2 - - 0.1 3.1 - - 0.1 
31 D&NH and 
D&D 33.5 - - 1.4 33.5 - 4.3 5.4 33.5 - - 1.4 
32 Delhi 66.5 - - 7.4 66.5 - - 7.4 66.5 - - 7.4 
33 J&K 6.4 55.2 28.6 28.2 79.3 40.0 40.0 11.3 75.9 86.3 24.8 1.7 
34 Ladakh 0.1 - - 3.8 0.1 1.8 1.2 1.5 5.3 - 4.1 - 
35 Puducherry 9.7 27.2 10.0 40.4 23.5 31.1 9.5 20.2 28.6 18.7 27.1 0.1 
Sub-total (UTs)  119.4 82.3 38.7 81.2 207.0 72.9 55.0 46.7 213.0 105.0 57.0 10.7 
Grand Total  18,185.6 5,790.9 5,331.4 10,135.8 26,277.4 19,726.9 3,883.8 8,692.7 26,679.2 15,007.9 10,936.3 5,211.7 
* Includes Central Assistance released during the year against houses sanctioned during preceding years. 
** Includes Central Assistance utilised during the year against the funds released during preceding years. 
 
 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Annexure-II  
State/UT-wise and year-wise details of houses sanctioned, completed and occupied during the last three years under PMAY-U              
and PMAY-U 2.0 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Physical Progress of Houses (Nos.) 
Sanctioned Construction Completed* Occupied** 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1,92,669 50,144 31,252 2,86,987 2,18,499 96,415 2,95,316 2,79,114 1,17,943 
2 Bihar 2,206 12,993 1,00,014 21,586 11,114 59,464 21,586 11,114 59,413 
3 Chhattisgarh 36,936 3,515 - 35,926 43,385 34,744 37,125 37,739 38,350 
4 Goa 330 - - 331 - 1 331 - 1 
5 Gujarat 1,42,005 11,496 - 1,99,047 28,953 39,297 1,86,633 37,157 44,127 
6 Haryana 5,142 - 15,256 13,508 3,677 2,937 13,508 3,677 2,921 
7 Himachal Pradesh 1,117 355 - 2,155 1,003 1,075 2,155 951 1,109 
8 Jharkhand 6,625 - - 15,774 17,127 17,644 14,894 16,035 17,251 
9 Karnataka 13,509 15,391 - 43,033 30,307 52,516 27,962 15,012 56,171 
10 Kerala 13,877 7,752 - 14,823 7,349 12,692 14,787 7,508 12,748 
11 Madhya Pradesh 66,380 9,502 - 1,75,161 1,11,350 88,269 1,76,673 1,10,375 90,610 
12 Maharashtra 1,20,775 27,114 - 1,81,298 38,022 1,32,919 1,59,796 43,510 1,54,839 
13 Odisha 1,325 18,769 5,304 27,740 12,785 18,989 27,487 11,538 19,522 
14 Punjab 24,284 - - 23,124 8,926 15,272 23,124 9,050 15,022 
15 Rajasthan 86,107 35,325 23,799 35,470 10,253 42,746 36,465 12,267 42,338 
16 Tamil Nadu 31,713 10,178 - 84,224 40,285 42,962 81,584 41,948 48,291 
17 Telangana 7,751 - 1,13,681 12,973 1,504 3,616 17,096 10,055 56,874 
18 Uttar Pradesh 1,25,420 1,56,763 55,625 2,06,465 1,99,690 2,32,572 2,00,267 1,85,729 2,27,908 
19 Uttarakhand 11,681 2,941 - 4,329 4,343 6,901 4,329 4,311 5,396 
20 West Bengal 12,264 - - 81,647 50,318 64,814 81,647 50,222 64,670 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
51

Sub-total (States)  9,02,116 3,62,238 3,44,931 14,65,601 8,38,890 9,65,845 14,22,765 8,87,312 10,75,504 
21 Arunachal Pradesh 8 - 5,278 3,193 1,498 641 1,657 1,498 961 
22 Assam 9,526 13,542 - 36,483 19,542 24,134 36,483 19,542 24,134 
23 Manipur 21 - - 5,690 2,934 3,085 5,690 2,934 3,085 
24 Meghalaya 4 - - 430 144 678 430 144 678 
25 Mizoram 270 - - 1,518 1,927 16,571 1,518 1,927 16,571 
26 Nagaland 1 - - 6,427 7,344 9,207 6,427 7,344 9,207 
27 Sikkim 26 - - 26 - - 26 - - 
28 Tripura 4,444 4,790 - 7,369 8,616 5,533 7,369 8,689 5,533 
Sub-total (NE States) 14,300 18,332 5,278 61,136 42,005 59,849 59,600 42,078 60,169 
29 A&N Islands 1 - - 3 - - 3 - - 
30 Chandigarh 130 - - 130 - - 130 - - 
31 D&NH and D&D 1,342 - - 2,325 469 270 1,463 101 1,171 
32 Delhi 2,669 - - 2,669 - - 2,669 - - 
33 J&K 266 3,677 1,272 6,622 3,626 9,127 6,622 3,626 9,127 
34 Ladakh 3 - - 106 139 89 106 139 89 
35 Puducherry 457 1,810 446 2,032 1,270 1,628 2,032 1,270 1,628 
Sub-total (UTs)  4,868 5,487 1,718 13,887 5,504 11,114 13,025 5,136 12,015 
Grand Total  9,21,284 3,86,057 3,51,927 15,40,624 8,86,399 10,36,808 14,95,390 9,34,526 11,47,688 
*    Includes houses completed in the year which were sanctioned in preceding years. 
** Includes houses occupied in the year which were completed in preceding years. 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Annexure-III  
State/UT-wise list of Shelters (as on 30.09.2024) 
S. No. Names of the States/UTs Functional Shelters 
1 Andhra Pradesh 95 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0 
3 Assam 6 
4 Bihar 111 
5 Chhattisgarh 47 
6 Goa 3 
7 Gujarat 78 
8 Haryana 54 
9 Himachal Pradesh 20 
10 Jammu and Kashmir 2 
11 Jharkhand 57 
12 Karnataka 108 
13 Kerala 27 
14 Madhya Pradesh 118 
15 Maharashtra 99 
16 Manipur 0 
17 Meghalaya 4 
18 Mizoram 96 
19 Nagaland 3 
20 Odisha 46 
21 Punjab 30 
22 Rajasthan 237 
23 Tamil Nadu 276 
24 Telangana 45 
25 Tripura 9 
26 Uttar Pradesh 145 
27 Uttarakhand 13 
28 West Bengal 70 
29 A&N Islands 0 
30 Chandigarh 1 
31 D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu 0 
32 Delhi 193 
33 Puducherry 2 
34 Ladakh 0 
Total 1,995 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: First supplementary, Shri Neeraj Shekhar. 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सभापित महोदय, ‘Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना – शहरी (PMAY-U)’ क े तहत 
सरकार ने करीब सवा करोड़ शहरी आवास बनाने का अपना गंतËय रखा है। उसमȂ से करीब 90 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
53

लाख आवास  माचर्, 2025 तक बन चुक े हȅ। मȅ इसके  िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी और माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी को बधाई देता हूँ। सभापित महोदय, मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह ĢÌन है िक उǄर Ģदेश तथा 
उससे जुड़े औǏोिगक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बड़ी संख्या मȂ आ वासीय आबादी का ध्यान रखते हुए ‘PMAY-U 
2.o’  क े अंतगर्त िकराये क े आवास क े िलए कौन-से िवशेष Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ और उनका लाभ 
कामगारȗ को जमीनी Îतर पर िकतना हो पाया है?  
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय,  Ģध ान मंतर्ी जी ने  Housing For All, यानी सभी क े िलए 
आवास की योजना क े अंतगर्त सराहनीय कायर् िकए हȅ। इस PMAY योजना की शुरुआत 2015 मȂ 
की गई थी और हमारे आदरणीय सदÎय ने अभी बताया भी है िक माचर्, 2025 तक िकतने आवास 
बन चुक े हȅ। महोदय, इस समय तक क ु ल 94 लाख लोगȗ को मकान उपलÅध हो चुक े हȅ। पहले जो 
योजना तय की गई थी, उसके  चार कÇपोनȂट्स तय िकए गए थे, िजसके  अंदर बेिनिफ
िशयरी-लेड 
Îकीम, अथार्त िजनके  पास अपना Ãल ॉट  है, वे गरीब लोग भी उस Ãलॉट पर आिर्थक सहायता 
लेकर अपना मकान बना सकते थे। इसी Ģकार, दूसरी योजना थी - अफोडȃबल हाउिंसग इन 
पाटर्नरिशप, िजनके  पास अपनी जमीन नहीं होती थी, ऐसे वगर् को अफोडȃबल हाउिंसग Îकीम क े 
अंतगर्त सÎते दामȗ पर मक ान उपलÅध कराए जाते थे। इसमȂ क Ȃ दर् की ओर से डेढ़ लाख रुपए िदए 
जाते थे, लेिकन संयोग ऐसा था िक उसमȂ Ģदेशȗ का अंशदान नहीं तय िकया गया था। Ģदेश 
अपनी ओर से जो योगदान करना चा हते थे, वह कर सकते थे। क ु छ Ģदेशȗ ने यह िकया भी और वे 
अच्छी संख्या मȂ मकान लेकर पिÅलक को दे सके , लेिकन िजन्हȗने यह नहीं िकया, वहाँ यह कमी 
रह गई। इसी Ģकार तीसरी इंटरेÎट सिÅसडी Îकीम थी। यह एमआईजी और एलआईजी लोगȗ क े 
िलए थी। जो अपना पैसा खचर् करके  मकान बनाते थे, बȅक से लोन लेते थे, इसके  माध्यम से उन्
हȂ 
इंटरेÎट मȂ सिÅसडी दी जाती थी, तािक उन्हȂ भी लाभ िमल सके । अंितम क ै टेगरी इन-िसटू Îलम 
िरडेवलपमȂट ( आईएसएसआर) की थी, अथार्त जो लोग झुग्ग
ी-झȗपड़ी मȂ रहते थे, उनके  िलए 
इन-िसटू मकान िदए जाएं। संयोग ऐसा हुआ िक इन-िसटू मकानȗ का िनमार्ण क े िलए योजना 
बनी, लेिकन बहुत  कम  लोग ही आगे आ पाए, क्यȗिक झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी वालȗ क े पास उतना पैसा 
नहीं होता था और इसमȂ सरकारी सह
ायता भी एक लाख रुपए थी, तो बहुत से Ģदेशȗ ने इसमȂ 
अपनी कम रुिच िदखाई। इसिलए इसे पीएमएवाई – यू 2.0 मȂ इसे बदल िदया गय ा और इसमȂ 
अफोडȃबल रȂटल हाउिंसग का Ģावधान िकया गया, तािक अगर लोग अपना मकान नहीं भी ले 
सकते हȅ, तो वे कम-से-कम िकराए मȂ रह सकȂ  और उन्हȂ िकराए क े मकान उपलÅध हो जाएं। इस 
Ģकार से इस योजना मȂ पिरव
तर्न करके  इसे पीएमएवाई – यू 2.0 मȂ लाया गया। अब किठनाई यह 
आई िक औǏोिगक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ रहने वाली Ģवासी आबादी क े लोगȗ को कौन सी योजना का लाभ 
िमले, तो अफोडȃबल रȂटल हाउिंसग Îकीम क े अंतगर्त ये लोग लाभ उठा रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक बहुत-से 
Ģवासी लोग Îथायी रूप से एक Îथान क े िनवासी नहीं होते। उन्हȂ लगता है िक वे अपना मकान न 
बनाएं, बिÊक िकराये पर मकान उपलÅध हो जाए, तो उन्हȂ सÎ
ते िकराए पर मकान िम लȂ,  इसके  
िलए पीएमएवाई - यू 2.0  मȂ यह Ģावधान िकया गया िक वकर् सर् क े िलए अलग से अफोडȃबल रȂटल 
हाउिंसग Îकीम का एक विर्टकल बनाया गया है और मȅ समझता हूँ िक उन्हȂ इसका पयार्Ãत लाभ 
िमला है। जो  लोग आवास का Îवािमत्व नहीं चाहते थे, उन्हȂ अÊपकालीन अविध क े िलए िकराए क े 
आवास की योजना का लाभ िमलता है।  
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary; Shriman Neeraj Shekhar. 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सभापित जी, सरकार ने शेÊटर फॉर अबर्न होमलेस योजना क े तहत परमानȂट 
शेÊटर बनाने का जो सराहनीय काम िकया है, उसके  िलए मȅ  उन्हȂ बधाई देना चाहता हूँ। मेरा 
दूसरा ĢÌन यह है िक क्य ा  राज्य सरकार पीएमएवाई - यू 2.0 क े अंतगर्त क Ȃ दर् सरकार, क Ȃदर्ीय 
सावर्जिनक क्षेतर् उपकर्मȗ, राज्य सावर्जिनक क्षेतर् उपकर्मȗ की भूिम पर झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी िवकास 
पिरयोजनाएं ĢÎतािवत कर सकती हȅ, क्यȗिक जो लोग झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी मȂ रहते हȅ, उनका जीवन 
बहुत कÍटदायक होता है।  उन्हȂ पक्के  घर िमलȂ, क्य
ा इसके  िलए आपकी योजनाएं इन जमीनȗ को 
ĢÎतािवत कर सकती हȅ?  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय महोदय ने िबÊकु ल ठीक िंचता Ëयƪ की है 
िक बहुत से लोग जो झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी मȂ रहते हȅ, उनकी अपनी जमीनȂ नहीं होती हȅ, बिÊक वे कहीं-
न-कहीं एन्कर्ोचमȂट करके  झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी बनाकर रहने लग जाते हȅ। मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूँ 
िक इन-िसटू योजना बनाने क े बाद भी वे उसमȂ नह ीं आते  हȅ। उनके  िलए बीएलसी मȂ Ãलॉट होना 
अिनवायर् है, इसिलए बहुत सी Ģदेश सरकारȂ ऐसे Ëयिƪयȗ, ऐसे पिरवारȗ को जमीन का आवंटन 
करती हȅ, तािक जमीन िमल जाए, तो वे बीएलसी Ģोजेक्ट क े अंतगर्त भी आ सकȂ । साथ ही 
अफोडȃबल हाउिंसग  Îकीम मȂ भी अब उन्हȂ ज्यादा रािश िमलती है, यानी पीएमएवाई - यू 2.0 मȂ 
पहले जहाँ क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से डेढ़ लाख रुप
ए िदए जाते थे, अब यह मȂडेटरी कर िदया गया 
है िक एक लाख रुपए राज्य सरकार भी देगी, िजससे उन् हȂ ढाई लाख रुपए िमलने क े बाद वे 
अफोडȃबल हाउिंसग Îकीम क े अंतगर्त भी मकान ĢाÃत कर सकते हȅ। यिद जमीन Ģदेश सरकार 
देती है तो ठीक है, अन्यथा बहुत से सीपीएसयूज़ और एसपीएसयूज़ हȅ, जो जमीन मȂ भी डी ल 
करते हȅ, उनके  पास अपनी जमीन होती है। उनके  िलए भी Ģावधान िकया गया है िक अगर वे 
हाउिंसग Îकीम क े िलए अपनी जमीन उपलÅध करवाते हȅ, तो ऐसे लोगȗ क े िलए उस जमीन का 
उपयोग िक
सी भी Îकीम मȂ करके  उनको मकान उपलÅध कराए जा सकते हȅ। इसमȂ कहीं कोई 
किठनाई नहीं है। हर िकसी को मकान िमले, इसके  िलए ऐसे बहुत से Ģकार बनाए गए हȅ। क ै से हम 
फ ैिसिलटेट कर सकते हȅ, होमलेस को क ै से मकान िमले, इसके  िलए अलग-अलग योजन
ाएं बनाई 
गई हȅ, उनमȂ अगर अन्य सुझाव भी आते हȅ, तो हम उन पर भी िवचार करने क े िलए तैयार हȅ। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Ms. Swati Maliwal. 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL: Thank you, Sir. JNNURM Scheme  क े अंतगर्त क Ȃ दर् सरकार और 
िदÊली सरकार ने 2016 मȂ हज़ारȗ करोड़ȗ की लागत से िदÊली मȂ 52,344 Äलैट्स गरीबȗ क े िलए 
बनाए, लेिकन आज तक इनमȂ से िदÊली सरकार ने िसफर्  4,871 Äलैट्स ही गरीबȗ को आवंिटत 
िकए। बाकी सारे घर पड़े-पड़े खंडहर बन गए हȅ। सर, मȅ खुद इन घरȗ को देख कर आई हूं। ये 
बहुत अच्छे खासे बड़े Äलैट्स थे, लेिकन अब पूरे  तर
ीके  से बबार्द हो चुक े हȅ। सर, तब की िदÊली 
सरकार ने यह घर गरीबȗ को इसिलए हȅडओवर नह
ीं िकए, क्यȗिक वे चाहते थे िक Îकीम क े नाम 
मȂ मुख्य मंतर्ी शÅद ऐड हो। िसफर्  इतने से credit war और vote bank politics क े चलते करोड़ȗ 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
55

का नुकसान हुआ और गरीब गरीब ही रह गया। Sir, I want to ask the hon. Minister as to 
whether the Government is planning to register an FIR against the then Delhi 
Government for blatant wastage of Government funds.  क्या इन Äलैट्स को ठीक करके  
गरीबȗ मȂ आवंिटत करने क े िलए अब कोई Ãलांस हȅ? ये अच्छे खासे Äलैट्स कब तक ऐसे ही पड़े 
रह जाएंगे? 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
Ǜी मनोहर ला
ल: सभापित महोदय, हमारी सदÎय महोदया ने यह बात ठीक कही है िक 2012 मȂ 
इस Îकीम क े अंतगर्त JNNURM क े मकान बनाए गए थे। इसमȂ Ģदेश सरकार का भी अपना रोल 
था और क Ȃ दर् सरकार का भी उस समय का रोल था, लेिकन मुझे इस बात की हैरानी है िक 2012 मȂ 
बनने क े बाद और Ģदेश सरकार ǎा
रा 10-12 साल मȂ भी आवंिटत नहीं िकए गए। मुझे यह कहने मȂ 
थोड़ा संकोच हो रहा है िक हमारी बहन सदÎया भी उसी पाटीर्, उसी सरकार क े साथ श ािमल थीं, 
लेिकन आज इनकी भी इच्छा है िक उसकी कोई इंक्वायरी कराई जाए और कमेटी बैठाकर जो 
दोषी लोग हȅ, उनके  िखलाफ कारवाई करनी चािहए।  वे मकान िबना आवंटन क े ऐसे ही पड़े हȅ 
और मुझे लगता है शायद वे मकान 30,000 से भी ऊप र हȅ। 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL: Sir, about 48,000. 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: आज भी 48,000 मकान हȅ। इतने सालȗ क े बाद वे खंडहर भी हो चुक े हȅ और 
कई जगह रहने लायक नहीं है। अब उनकी मरÇमत कराने क े िलए िदÊली सरकार आगे आई है। 
झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी क े जो लोग उनमȂ जाकर रहना चाह
ते हȅ, जो इस लेवल क े बनते हȅ, उनको तो वहां 
रखा जाएगा।  जो livable नहीं हȅ, उनकी जांच करवाकर और उनको तोड़कर नए िसरे से बनाया 
जाएगा।  इन् हȗन े जैसा सुझाव िदया है, हम  उस पर िवचार करȂगे िक उसके  दोिषयȗ क े िखलाफ 
क्या कारर्वाई की जाए। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary, Shri Subhasish Khuntia. 
Ǜी शुभाशीष खुंिटया: जय जगन्नाथ! चेयरमैन सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
पूछना चाहता हूं िक ओिडशा को Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना मȂ िकत ने फ ंड्स एलोके ट िकए गए हȅ 
और उनमȂ से िकतना यूिटलाइज़ेशन हुआ है? 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, देश भर क े अंदर मकानȗ की संख्या जैसे बताई गई है, वह 
PMAY-
1 मȂ सȂक्शन होने क े बाद 1 करोड़  12 लाख  है और उनमȂ से 90 लाख से ऊपर आवंिटत 
िकए जा चुक े हȅ। चूंिक यह ĢÌन इस िवषय से जुड़ा हुआ नहीं है,  िफर िपछले तीन वषș क े आंकड़े 
मेरे पास हȅ, वह मȅ बता देता हूं। मȅ माननीय सदÎय को ओिडशा क े संबंध मȂ िपछले 3 वषर् का िहसाब 
बता सकता हूं, क्यȗिक ĢÌन ही 3 वषर् का आया था। 3 वषर् क े अंदर ओिडशा मȂ - 2022-23 मȂ 
1,325 मकान, 2023-24
 मȂ 27,740 मकान और 2024-25 मȂ 5,304 मकान सȂक्शन हुए।  ओिडशा 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

का क ु ल आंकड़ा है – 2,23,000 मकान सȂक्शन हुए, 1,92,000 मकान grounded हुए और 
1,69,000 मकान मȂ क ंÎटर्क्शन कÇÃलीट हुई। ये सब approximate संख्या है। इसमȂ जो इन्वेÎटमȂट 
हुआ है, 10 हजार करोड़ रुपए का इन्वेÎटमȂट यहां सȂक्शन हुआ था, िजसमȂ सȂटर्ल अिसÎटȂस 
3,484 करोड़ रुपए की थी। इस Ģकार से ये ओिड
शा क े आंकड़े हȅ।  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary, Shri Sat Paul Sharma. 
Ǜी सत पाल शमार्: चेयरमैन सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जÇमू-कÌमीर क े िवषय 
मȂ क ु छ जान कारी  चाहता हूं। जÇमू-कÌमीर भी हमारा एक ऐसा क्षेतर् है, जहाँ पर गरीब तबके  क े जो 
लोग हȅ, वे बहुत मातर्ा मȂ मौजूद हȅ। माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने यहां पर ओिडशा की िफगसर् पढ़ी हȅ। इस 
संबंध मȂ मुझे क ु छ ध्यान आया है िक शायद इन िफगसर् मȂ जो िफगसर् जÇमू-कÌमीर क े संदभर् मȂ दी 
गई हȅ, हो सकता है िक उनमȂ कहीं न कहीं थोड़ा संशोधन करने की आवÌयकता है। माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी क ृपया इस िवषय को देखȂगे। 
 जहां तक मकानȗ और परमानȂट शेÊटसर् का ĢÌन है, पूरे भारतवषर् मȂ 1,995 शेÊटसर् हȅ, 
लेिकन जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ और वह भी जÇमू मȂ मातर् दो शेÊटसर् हȅ, जो गरीबȗ क े िलए बनाए गए हȅ, 
जबिक हम समझते हȅ िक िभखारी और गरीब तबके  क े लोग भी होते हȅ, िजनके  िलए शेÊटसर् 
आवÌयक होते हȅ। इसिलए मेरा मानना है िक इस  िफगर  को  बढ़ाया  जाए। मȅ जब इसे देख रहा 
था, तो चा
र Ģदेशȗ मȂ -- हमारा जÇमू-कÌमीर भी पहले Îटेट था, अभी यह यूटी मȂ कन्वटर् हो गया 
है -- लगभग चार Ģदेश - उǄर Ģदेश, महाराÍटर्, गुजरात और आंधर् Ģदेश - ऐसे हȅ, जहां लाख से 
भी ज्यादा मक
ान बने हȅ, लेिकन जहां तक तीन साल का ĢÌन है, जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ मातर् 19,375 
मकान बनाए गए हȅ। इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी से चाहूंगा िक जÇमू-कÌमीर क े 
िवषय मȂ जो जानकारी आपकी िफगसर् मȂ रखी गई है, उसको क ृपया एक्सÃलेन करȂ। 
Ǜी सभापित: ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर। 
Ǜी मनोहर ला
ल: सभापित महोदय, ये जो िफगसर् हȅ, ये ऑथȂिटके टेड िफगसर् हȅ। जहां तक मकान 
क े कम या ज्यादा होने का ĢÌन है, ये सब िडमांड-बेÎड सȅक्शन होते हȅ और उसी िहसाब से फ ंड्स 
जारी िकए जाते हȅ। िजस Îटेट से िजतनी िडमांड आती है, इसके  िलए ऑनलाइन िडमांड ली 
जाती है, बाद मȂ उसका सवȃ कराया जाता है और िफर वह सȅक्शन होता है। इसिलए इस योजना मȂ 
िकस Ģदेश ने िकतने मकान िलए हȅ, िकतने नहीं िलए हȅ, पीए
मएवाई-वन, जो हमारा पहला Ģयोग 
था, उसके  अंदर बहुत से अंतर आए हȅ। अभी पीएमएवाई-ट ू मȂ मोटे रूप से हमने तय िकया है िक 
Ģो राटा जैसी आबादी है, उसके  िहसाब से हम इसको सȅक्शन करȂगे। िजस Ģदेश की िडमांड नहीं 
होगी, उसक
ो हम दूसरे Ģदेशȗ मȂ भी िशÄट कर सकते हȅ। हम इस योजना का िकर्यान्वयन बहुत 
साइंिटिफक तरीके  से कर रहे हȅ। िफर, माननीय सदÎय ने शेÊटसर् क े िवषय मȂ जो बात कही है, 
तो ये शेÊटसर् पीएमएवाई का िहÎसा नहीं हȅ, ये एनयूएलएम का िहÎसा हȅ। उस क े  नाते वे इसके  बारे 
मȂ अलग से ĢÌन करȂगे, तो बताया जाएगा। िफर भी यिद उनको इस संबंध मȂ कोई जानकारी 
चािहए, तो वह उनको उपलÅध करा दी जाएगी। 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
57

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 94. 
Smart City Mission in Guwahati 
*94. MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Will the Minist er of HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS be 
pleased to state: 
(a) the total funds allocated, released and utilised in Guwahati under Smart 
City Missionduring the last three years, year-wise; 
(b) the component-wise break-up of funds, including expenditure on roads, 
drainage, watersupply, solid waste management, housing, ICT and other 
sectors; 
(c) the total funds allocated and utilised specifically for drainage under the 
Mission; 
(d) the number of drainage and flood-mi tigation projects sanctioned and 
completed/ongoingin Guwahati, along with their present status; and 
(e)  whether any proposal has been approved or is under consideration for 
inclusion of Silchar under Smart City-related flood mitigation 
project/programme? 
THE MINISTER OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (SHRI MANOHAR LAL): (a) to 
(e) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
 (a) Guwahati is selected under the Smart Cities Mission (SCM) from the 
State of Assam. As reported by the State, as on 15.01.2026, out of a total 21 projects 
amounting to ₹755Cr, 20 projects (95% of total projects) amounting to ₹746Cr have 
been completed and 01 project amounting to ₹9 Crisat implementation stage. 
Guwahati has been able to claim its entire central financial assistance of ₹490 Cr and 
has completely utilized the same. 
(b) to (d)  The objective of SCM was not the development of entire city but to 
follow an area-based development approach  through retrofitting, redevelopment, 
greenfield development and a Pan-city initia tive in which smart solutions are applied 
covering larger parts of the city, so as to create a replicable model.  Under the 
Mission, states were empowered to select, appraise and implement projects as per 
their priorities and scheme guidelines. The project proposals were approved by High 
Powered Steering Committee (HPSC) chaired by the Chief Secretary of the State. 
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

The details of projects undertaken in va rious sectors in Guwahati Smart City 
are at Annexure. 
(e) With the closure of the SCM on 31 stMarch, 2025, there is no budgetary 
provision under the Mission to take any other city. 
 
Annexure 
Sector-wise details of projects in Guwahati 
(Amount in ₹ Cr)  
S. 
No. 
City  
Name 
Project Name Sector Total 
Project 
Cost 
Physical 
Progress 
Status 
1 Guwahati Brahmaputra River 
Front Development 
(Phase 1) 
Area 
Development 
181 100 Work 
Completed 
2 Guwahati Installation of 
National Flag at 
Gandhi Mandap 
Area 
Development 
3 100 Work 
Completed 
3 Guwahati Development of 
Judge Field 
Area 
Development 
6 100 Work 
Completed 
4 Guwahati Miscellaneous Infra 
& Deposit work - 
Brahmaputra River 
Front part works 
Area 
Development 
44 100 Work 
Completed 
5 Guwahati Procurement of 
Drain De-Silting 
Super Sucker 
Machines with 
Dump Storage 
(10nos) 
Sewerage 
and Septage 
26 100 Work 
Completed 
6 Guwahati Installation of Water 
ATMs 
Water 
Supply 
2 100 Work 
Completed 
7 Guwahati Installation of Smart 
Bio-Toilets 
Solid Waste 
Management 
10 100 Work 
Completed 
8 Guwahati Installation of High 
Mast Light Pole at 
Shankardev 
Kalakshetra 
Energy 1 100 Work 
Completed 
9 Guwahati Implementation of 
Street Light Poles 
Energy 15 100 Work 
Completed 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
59

under Project Jyoti 
Phase II scheme on 
design build operate 
basis with operation 
and maintenance 
10 Guwahati Installation of LED 
Street Lights in 
selected Spine 
Roads 
Energy 23 100 Work 
Completed 
11 Guwahati Installation of LED 
Street Light under 
"Project Jyoti -
Phase 1" 
Energy 14 100 Work 
Completed 
12 Guwahati Procurement of 200 
(two hundred) Air-
Conditioned  electric 
buses for Guwahati 
City 
Urban 
Transport 
295 100 Work 
Completed 
13 Guwahati Procurement of 100 
(one hundred) Air 
Conditioned CNG 
operated Buses for 
operation in 
Guwahati City and 
connecting sub-
urban areas 
Urban 
Transport 
38 100 Work 
Completed 
14 Guwahati ITMS Based- 
Integrated Traffic 
Management 
System (Phase 1) 
Urban 
Transport 
46 100 Work 
Completed 
15 Guwahati Gandhi Mandap 
Light and Sound 
SHow 
Economic 
Development 
6 100 Work 
Completed 
16 Guwahati Redevelopment and 
Improvement of 
Gandhi Mandap 
Economic 
Development 
3 100 Work 
Completed 
17 Guwahati Development of 
Museum and 
Maintenance/Repair 
of the Gandhi 
Economic 
Development 
5 100 Work 
Completed 
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Mandap 
18 Guwahati Development of 
Ashwaklanta 
Devalaya Premises 
Economic 
Development 
11 100 Work 
Completed 
19 Guwahati Development of 
Umananda Devalaya 
Premises 
Economic 
Development 
14 100 Work 
Completed 
20 Guwahati Streetscape for 
Beautification at 
Sankardev 
Kalakshetra 
Economic 
Development 
5 100 Work 
Completed 
21 Guwahati Installation of 
Illumination and 
Technology (Laser) 
based show at 
Shankardev 
Kalakshetra 
Economic 
Development 
9 95 At 
implementation 
stage  
  Total 755   
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Sir, I had asked a question on the Smart City Mission. The hon. 
Minister has replied that, as of 2025, this project has not been extended. The 
question was specifically on Guwahati. An amount of Rs.755 crores was spent, Sir, 
under the Smart City Mission for the city of  Guwahati. But, two hours of rain, Smart 
City of Guwahati becomes a sinking city of Guwahati. Now, given that this Mission is 
closed, I would like to know this from the hon. Minister. My data shows around 40 per 
cent of your allocation, Rs.38000 crore pl us, has remained unspe nt as of March, 
2025.  Sir, I would like to ask of the hon. Minister whether there is any proposal from 
the State Government of Assam to fix the serious menace of flas h floods in Guwahati 
because it has taken the life of a young boy called Avinash in 2024. Thank you, Sir. 
Ǜी सभापित: ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर। 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, यह जो आंकड़ा बताया जा रहा है, यह मालूम नहीं िक 
उन्हȗने यह आंकड़ा कहां से िलया है। इसके  अंदर गवनर्मȂट ऑफ इंिडया की ओर से 48,00 0 
करोड़ क े फ ंड्स सȅक्शन िकए गए हȅ, िजनमȂ िसटीज़ क े 47,458 करोड़ रुपए क े जो खचȃ हुए हȅ, वे 
Îटेट्स ने क्लेम कर िलए हȅ। इसमȂ 15.1.2026 तक िजनके  यूिटलाइजेशन सिर्टिफके ट्स आ गए 
हȅ, उनके  46,231 करोड़ रुपए का भुगत
ान िकया जा चुका है। इसिलए आप इस आंकड़े को थोड़ा 
ठीक कर लȂ। जहां तक िकसी भी Ģोजेक्ट क े िवषय की बात है, तो जैसा मȅने इस Ģोजेक्ट क े बारे मȂ 
बताया, पहला तो Smart City Mission क े projects demonstrative होते हȅ और एक छोटे part 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
61

मȂ इनका काम िकया जाता है।  इनका जो total budget होता है, उसमȂ 50 परसȂट क Ȃ दर् का, यानी 
500 करोड़ रुपये, 50 परसȂट Ģदेश का, यानी 500 करोड़ रुपये और पहाड़ी राज्यȗ क े 50 परसȂट, 
यानी 500 करोड़  क े साथ 50 करोड़  रुपये या 10 परस Ȃट, अथार्Þ क ु ल 550 करोड़  रुपये होते हȅ। 
इसमȂ पूरे शहर की सारी योजनाएं तो नहीं बना सकते, िफर भी इसमȂ hundreds of Schemes हȅ, 
िजनको वहां की Îटेट को चयन करना था िक कौन-कौन सी Sc
hemes मȂ हम पैसा लगाना चाहते 
हȅ। अगर वे Water क े ऊपर लगाना चाहते हȅ, तो वहां पर लगाएं, technology क े ऊपर लग ाना है, 
तो वहां पर लगाएं। इसमȂ भी तीन Ģकार क े models िदए गए थे। एक तो ‘city improvement’ क े 
िलए retrofitting model है, िजसे 500 एकड़ की िसटी मȂ, यानी एक large base area क े अंदर 
लागू िकया जा सकता है। दूसरा, re-development model है, िजसमȂ cit y का renewal है, जो 
िक 50 एकड़ क े एिरया मȂ ही िकया जा सकता है और तीसरा, Greenfield Development Model 
है, िजसके  अंदर 250 एकड़ जमीन पर, उस एिरया क े अंदर, इस Ģकार क े काम कराए जा सकते 
हȅ।  It is up to the State िक उनकी जो अपनी committees बनी हȅ, उन committees क े आधार 
पर उनको कौन सा काम कराना है। उनको full city का काम कराना है या कोई part of the city 
का काम कराना है, क्यȗिक इसका जो बजट है, वह सीिमत है।  उसके  अंदर िजतने भी Ģोजेक्ट्स 
बनाए जाएंगे, वो replicable हȅ। अन्य िसटीज़ मȂ या उसी िसटी क े अंदर अगर अन्य Ģकार क े वैसे 
ही Ģोजेक्ट्स बनाने हȅ, तो वह सब कर सकते हȅ। इसिलए इनके  जो components हȅ, बहुत बड़े 
components हȅ, लेिकन बजट सीिम
त होने क े कारण, यह Îटेट्स का चयन कर न े का अपना 
अिधकार है िक वे िकस Ģोजेक्ट मȂ काम करते हȅ और िकसमȂ नहीं करते हȅ। िफर भी, गुवाहाटी क े 
अंदर क्या-क्या काम हुए हȅ, वे सब उǄर मȂ बताए जा चुक े हȅ। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Ms. Sushmita Dev.  
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:  Thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity. Sir, 65 per cent 
of the population of the North-Eastern Stat es live in the State of Assam. Given that 
Smart City Mission is now a closed project, I would like to ask the hon. Minister: Will 
other towns and cities like Dibrugarh, like Si lchar get the opportunity like a Smart City 
Mission project to build infrastructure? सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह भी कहना चाहती हूं 
िक हमȂ बहुत दुख है। आप िसलचर जरूर आइएगा, आपको आमंतर्ण है। 5 सालȗ से Silchar 
Municipality मȂ असम सरकार ने चुनाव ही नहीं कराए हȅ, तो हम compete क ै से करȂगे, जहां 
elected body ही नहीं है? Sir, is there a policy of the Gove rnment to look into tier-II and 
tier-III towns and cities of Assam, which has the maximum population of the North-
Eastern States? 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, िवषय क ेवल Smart City Mission का है। Smart City 
Mission मȂ जो number of cities है और कौन- कौन सी cities हȗगी, यह िबÊकु ल तय कर िदया 
गया था और 100 cities का  चयन िकया गया था।  यह काम क ेवल उन 100 cities मȂ था और 
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

िदसंबर, 2025 तक इनके  सारे Ģोजेक्ट्स क े िलए क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से जो बजट या funds 
जाने थे, चले गए थे। यह Îकीम अब बंद हो चुकी है और इस नाते से आगे इस Scheme क े खुले न 
होने क े कारण,  इसमȂ िकसी नई city क े शािमल होने का कोई िवषय नहीं है।   
अन्य शहरȗ मȂ िजस Ģकार क े काम हȅ, हमारी बहुत सी योजनाएं हȅ, िजनमȂ अमृत  Îकीम 
भी है, उसमȂ PMAY भी है और उसी तरह Îवच्छ भारत िमशन है या NULM है , बहुत सी 
Schemes हȅ। अब Urban Challenge Fund क े नाम से 1 लाख  करोड़ रुपए का sanction, यह  
भारत सरकार ने अपने िपछले वषर् क े बजट मȂ घोिषत िकया था, उनके  funds भी जाएंगे। अन्य 
शहरȗ मȂ infrastructure क े िलए इस बार क े बजट मȂ 11 लाख करोड़ रुपये की ËयवÎथा की है और 
ऐसे ही City Economic Regions मȂ, हर Region को 5,000 करोड़ रुपये infrastructure क े िलए 
घोिषत िकये गये हȅ। इस Ģकार, िजन शहर मȂ काम कराना है, अगली योजनाओं मȂ करा सकते हȅ, 
लेिकन Smart City Mission क े तहत िजतने काम होने थे, सारे काम हो गए हȅ तथा उसमȂ कहीं 
िकसी Ģकार की कोई योजना और आगे नहीं है। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Shrimaan Kartikeya Sharma. 
Ǜी कािर्तके य शमार्: चेयरमैन सर, Smart City Mission क े तहत क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने SPVs, यानी 
Special Purpose Vehicles क े भिवÍय और ICCCs, यानी Integrated Command and Control 
Centres क े operation and maintenance क े िलए क्या कदम उठाए हȅ?  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित जी, शहर मȂ िजतने Ģोजेक्ट्स थे, उनके  िलए एक SPV (Special 
Purpose Vehicle) बनाया गया था, लेिकन अब वे काम पूरे हुए हȅ, तो चूँिक उस एसपीवी का 
गठन हुआ है, इसिलए आगे उसको िकस Ģकार से का म मȂ िलया जाए, उसके  िलए हमने 
गाइडलाइन्स क े नाते से बहुत-सी चीजȂ भेजी हȅ एसपीवी का repurpose करने क े िलए, यानी 
promoting use of technology in urba n management, project implementation, 
consulting support - ये अन्य शहरȗ क े िलए जो कर सकते हȅ, इनको और आगे बढ़ाने क े 
िलए.... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. Now the Ho use stands adjourned to meet at 
2.00 p
.m. 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
 
  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
63

The House re-assembled at two of the clock. 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
THE UNION BUDGET, 2026-2027 
MR. CHAIRMAN: General discussion on the Union Budget, 2026-27. I call upon     
Shri P. Chidambaram to start the discussion. 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (karnataka): Sir, neither the Cabinet Minister, nor the 
Minister of State for Finance is there. …(Interruptions)…   
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Minister is sitting here. 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Neither the Cabinet Minister nor MoS, Finance is there. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The MoS, Finance is there. You need to check your specs!  Please 
start, Mr. Chidambaram. 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Ch airman, Sir, I am honoured that my 
Party has asked me to start the debate on the Budget. I want to first frame the scope 
of the debate. Under the rules and the tradition of this House, in a Budget discussion, 
every subject, every Ministry, every Depart ment for whom money is allocated, the 
appropriation is sought to be discussed. I think the House will agree with my framing 
of the scope of the debate.  
The first point I wish to make is this. The Economic Survey is prepared by the 
Economics Division of the Finance Ministry. A lot of people put in a lot of work and do 
a lot of research and analysis  to prepare the Survey. It runs to over 700 pages. The 
narration is about 450 pages and the statistical appendix is over 200 pages. I wonder 
whether the Government and its key Ministers read the Economic Survey. The most 
charitable view is that they don't care for the Chief Economic Advisor. The 
uncharitable view is that while the Chief Economic Advisor is bringing the Government 
d o w n  t o  e a r t h  b y  s a y i n g  w h a t  i s  h a p p ening around the country, I think, the 
Governments and the Ministers want to soar high and reach another planet as if we 
are not living on Earth. 
Sir, there are a number of challenges lis ted in the Economic Survey. I will take 
up only four challenges. Talking about ca pital investment, for some years now, for 
almost 12 years, capital investment, Gross Fixed Capital Formation, is stuck at 30 per 
cent of GDP. Net FDI in 2024-25 has colla psed to less than 0.09 per cent. FPIs, 
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Foreign Portfolio Investors, are pulling out.  Private investment, although companies 
are cash rich, is stuck at 22 per cent of GDP. In this situation, where neither the public 
sector, nor the private sector, nor the foreig n investor is investing in India, this 
Government has cut capital expenditure. In  the year that ended, 2025-2026, they 
have cut capital expenditure by a whopping Rs.1,44,376 crore. The Centre has cut its 
capital expenditure by Rs.25,335 crore and what is worse is, the State's capital 
expenditure, for which the Centre gives advances, is cut by Rs.1,19,041 crore. 
Should there not be an explanation? Why did you not give the money? Or, did you 
impose conditions which the States cannot fulfill? There must be a reason for that. No 
reason in the hon. Finance Minister's speech.   
Sir, the second challenge is unemployment. All of us agree, all of us should 
agree, in our constituencies, the most number of requests is for jobs. Youth 
unemployment is 15 per cent. Less than 25 per cent of the workforce is in regular 
employment. There is a shift to self-e mployment and more workers are in the 
agriculture sector than they were four or five years ago.  In a country with 144 crore 
people, only 195 lakh, that is less than  2 crore, are employed in a factory. 
Manufacturing, which is largely factories, is stuck at 16 per cent for many, many 
years.  I will give you an example. The PM  Internship Scheme was touted. Last year, 
the Finance Minister made that statement. Corporate houses were persuaded to offer 
internships. 1,65,000 offers came. Only 33,000 were accepted. Are there no young 
men and women to accept an internship in big companies? Only 33,000 accepted. 
And of the 33,000 who accepted, 6,000 left the job. So, what is wrong with the 
Internship Scheme? She touted it last ye ar. She must explain why the Scheme has 
totally failed this year.  
The third challenge is the slow growth  rate. In paragraph 14 of the hon. 
Finance Minister's Budget speech, she said, and I will re-quote that, “The Reform 
Express is well in its way and will mainta in its momentum to help us fulfill our 
kartavya.” The Reform Express is well in its way. Along with Vande Bharat and Tejas, 
they may even introd uce a train called ‘Reform Express’! But the ‘Reform Express’ is 
stuck. It is not derailed yet, but it is stuck. Look at the nominal growth rate. The 
nominal growth rate in 2023-2024 was 12 per cent. In 2024-2025, it came down to 9.8 
per cent. In 2025-2026, the year which will end in a month, it has come down to 8 per 
cent. Where is the ‘Reform Express’ gathering momentum? You refer to the real GDP 
growth. But Dr. Surjit Bhalla, one of your strongest supporters, has mocked the real 
GDP growth.                                
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
65

That is because your CPI inflation is half  a per cent. Your wholesale inflation is 
negative. Your deflator is only 0.5.  With these numbers, you can always make a GDP 
growth, but the nominal growth has come do wn from 12 per cent in 2023-24 to 9.8 
per cent in 2024-25 and 8 per cent in 2025-26. I am glad the hon. Finance Minister is 
there. I am pointing out that Paragraph-14 of your Budget Speech is totally wrong and 
unacceptable.    
Now, I will talk about the last challenge. There the other Members who will 
touch upon other challenges. The last challe nge is the slow fiscal consolidation.  
Now, fiscal deficit is a well-known measure and an internationally-accepted measure.  
I find that the Government is moving away from fiscal deficit to debt-to-GDP ratio.  
Dr. Rangarajan, one of the most knowledg eable economists in this country, has 
pointed out that the two are in ter-dependent.  If fiscal deficit comes down, the debt-
to-GDP ratio will also come down. If the debt-to-GDP ratio comes down, the fiscal 
deficit will also come down. It is two sides of the same coin.  I would not elaborate on 
that. The fiscal deficit in 2025-26 is 4.4 per cent. She has achieved her target. But 
next year, it will come down only to 4.3 per cent. And the reve nue deficit, in the 
current year, will be 1.5 per cent, and the next year also, it will remain at 1.5 per cent. 
Now, what is the FRBM targ et? The FRBM target is 3 per cent of fiscal deficit, 
and regarding the revenue deficit, the idea is to eliminate the revenue deficit, but it 
can be up to one per cent. At this rate of  consolidation, which Dr. Rangarajan, in a 
very analytical article, has called out as a mockery, it  will take 12 year s to achieve the 
FRBM target. The FRBM target was last achieved only in one year, that is, 2007-08, 
on the fiscal deficit. Since then, the fiscal deficit has ballooned, and then they are 
trying to bring it down. But, at this rate of  fiscal consolidation, it is like taking baby 
steps. Taking baby steps will not allow yo u to run a hundred-me ter or a thousand-
meter race. And then, what saved the hon. Finance Minister? It is not because of 
higher revenues or higher financial disciplin e. What saved her was the fact that she 
cut total expenditure by Rs.1 lakh crore an d the RBI gave a dividend of Rs.3 lakh 
crore. That is how she saved the fiscal de ficit. But for these cruel cuts in capital 
expenditure, but for the bonanza received from  the RBI, the fiscal deficit will not be 
4.4 per cent; it will be 5.5 per cent.   
The other challenges listed in the Econ omic Survey will be taken up by my 
learned friends. Now, I am looking for the hon. Minister, Shri Shivraj Singh Chauhan, 
and the hon. Minister, Shri C.R. Patil. I am amazed under one Minister's charge, 
under one Minister's watch, in Agriculture and Rural Development, there is a cut in 
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

expenditure of Rs.60,000 crore. Agricultur e has been cut by Rs.6,985 crore. Rural 
Development has been cut by Rs.53,067 cror e. Do our rural areas not require any 
development? What is the Minister doing?  What are our officers doing? What are 
they doing throughout the year that in one year, you spend Rs.60,052 crore less?  
In the Gram Sadak Yojana – when the villages are crying for gram roads -- 
Rs. 7,201 crore is the cut. On Awas yojana, the much-touted housing scheme, the 
cut is Rs. 22,331 crore.  Don’t our people  require roads? Don’t our people require 
houses?  
 Under the Grants-in-aid to the States, the cut is Rs. 30,391 crores. You blame 
the States but why don’t you give them money and there is not even a word of 
explanation for this cut. Hon. Prime Minister or somebody in the Cabinet must ask the 
Ministers as to why there is a cut of Rs. 60,000 crore in the ministries under their 
watch. I am looking for hon. Minister, Shri C.R. Patil also. The Jal Jeevan Mission 
was allotted Rs. 67,000 crores. Do you know ho w much did they spend? Out of      
Rs. 67,000 crores allotted, they spent only Rs. 17,000 crores. What is this going on? 
Why is there a Budget? People are dying because of polluted water, contaminated 
water in Indore. Today, we read a story in the newspaper about a dalit village in one 
of the States where four sisters committed suicide. The reporter who went to the 
village found out that there is no tap water,  there are no public toilets, there are no 
personal housing toilets, and, then, you do not spend on roads, you do not spend on 
housing, and, the Jal Jeevan Mission gets a cut of Rs. 50,000 crore!   
 The Defence expenditure is at a low of  11.4 per cent of total expenditure. 
Defence expenditure is 1.6 pe r cent of GDP and Defence ex penditure is 11.4 per cent 
of the total expenditure, and, it is an all- time low! Scientific departments headed by 
my good friend, suave friend, did not spend Rs. 18,665 crore, Urban Development 
department did not spend Rs. 39,573 crore, and, the Social Welfare department was 
cut by a round number, that is, Rs. 9,999 crore. What are the Ministers doing? Why 
are they not fulfilling programmes and spending the money?   
 Sir, I must compliment the hon. Fina nce Minister. She has found a way, she 
has found a formula to mesmerize, at leas t, one half of the House. She throws 
schemes, funds, missions, committees. I counted 24. One-half of the House 
applauded, but here is the situation. In ‘Bio Pharma Shakti’, she has allotted Rs. 
10,000 crores in the next five years. Th is Government has already completed two 
years. It has only got three mo re years. How can it allot for five years; be that as it 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
67

may. Rs. 10,000 crore have been allotted for five years. She is optimistic. I 
congratulate her and wish her well for he r optimism. Out of Rs. 10,000 crore, the 
allocation in 2026-27 is Rs. 500 crores. 
 Indian Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0 has been mentioned. What 
happened to ISM 1.0? There is no mention. On the Revenue account, Rs. 1,000 crore 
allocation is there. For the Electronics Compon ent Manufacturing Scheme,             
Rs. 22,919 crore has been expanded to Rs. 40,000 crore. It is good. But the 
allocation is Rs. 1, 500 crore. At page 20 of the expenditure Budget, there is a note 
which refers to the three dedicated chemical  parks. But the outlay is zero. For the 
scheme for container manufacturing, Rs. 10 ,000 crore has been allocated in five 
years, but at page 21, allocation is zero. National Fiber Scheme, Mega Textile Park 
Scheme, Mahatma Gandhi Swaraj  Institute -- I am gratef ul that they remembered 
Mahatma Gandhi and they brought him back to a Scheme -- there are 
announcements, but where the outlay is -- I could not find any outlay for any of these 
schemes. For the Champion Small Manufacturi ng Enterprises, which is for small and 
medium manufacturing enterprises, the allocation is Rs. 54 crore. How do you 
allocate Rs. 54 crore to champion SMEs?  
Sir, I am afraid this Budget is cautiou s, parsimonious, forgetful of the past 
year, and this will vanish. It has alread y vanished from the newspapers. Another 
Minister and another deal are occupying th e front pages now. The Finance Minister 
and the Finance Minister's Budget Speech ha s vanished. This is a forgettable Budget 
which has been prepared by a Finance Minist er who forgot her promises made in this 
House last year. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shriman Arun Singh.   
Ǜी अरुण िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित जी, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने हमȂ बोलने का मौका 
िदया। सभापित जी, माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने लगातार नौवीं बार 
बजट पेश िकया  है। यह इितहास है। वे भी तिमलनाडु से आती हȅ और देश की िवǄ मंतर्ी हȅ। सभी 
देशवािसयȗ को यह बजट पेश होते और सुनने का सौभाग्य ĢाÃत हुआ है। सभापित जी, जब हम 
बजट का सा
इज देखते हȅ, तो पाते हȅ िक क ु ल िमलाकर यह 53.5 लाख करोड़ रुपए का है। 
माननीय सदÎय अभी एक-एक हेड ऑफ अकाउंट की चचार् कर रहे थे, मȅ बताना चा
हता हूँ िक 
अगर इनके  समय मȂ पूरे बजट का साइज देखȂ, तो  वह 16.65 लाख करोड़ रुपए था, मतलब यह 
है िक अब पहले से लगभ ग तीन गुना बजट का साइज हुआ है। यह Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ सÇभव हुआ है िक 53.5 लाख करोड़ रुपए का बजट पेश िकया गया है। अगर हम इस बजट को 
देखȂगे, तो पाएंगे िक यह लोगȗ की आकांक्षाओं को सशƪ करने वाला है, हमारी आिर्थक Ģगित को 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

और तेज गित से आगे बढ़ाने वाला है और सबका साथ, सबका िवकास क े मूल मंतर् को संकÊप क े 
साथ िसǉ करने का Ģयास इसमȂ िदखाई देता है।  
सर, अगर िफÎकल डेिफिसट की बात करते हȅ, तो हम सबको देखना चािहए िक क ु ल 
िमलाकर साढ़े बारह लाख करोड़ रुपए क ै पेक्स एक्सपȂिडचर है, लगभग 12.20 लाख करोड़ रुपए 
क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर है, जो इनके  सम
य मȂ पहले दो से ढाई लाख करोड़ रुपए हुआ करता था। 
िविभन्न योजनाओं क े माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार 17. 72 लाख करोड़ रुपये खचर् करने जा रही है, 4.5 
लाख करोड़ रुपये की सिÅसडी देने जा रही है। साथ ही साथ, हमने नेक्Îट जनरेशन जीएसटी को 
देखा, जब यह लागू हुआ, तब इसे देशवािसयȗ ने बचत उत्सव क े रूप मȂ मनाया।  
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
जीएसटी की दरȂ कम करने से देशवािसयȗ को एक लाख करोड़ रुपये का लाभ हुआ। एक 
तरफ खचर् बढ़
ाना, दूसरी तरफ जीएसटी क े माध्यम से लोगȗ को लाभ देना, इसके  बावजूद भी 
अगर िफÎक
ल डेिफिसट 4.3 परसȂट अगले साल का लÑय रखा गया है, तो मȅ ǭदय से माननीया 
िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का अिभनंदन करता हूँ िक िकसी भी Ģकार से क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर मȂ कटौती नहीं 
की गई। सर, 2013-14 मȂ जब काँगर्ेस का समय था और इनकी सरकार थी, तब पॉिलसी 
पैरािलिसस था, िनराशा का वातावरण था और हम ģ ैजाइल फाइव की इकोनॉमी मȂ थे। उस सम
य 
भी िफÎकल डेिफिसट 4.5 परसȂट था, लेिकन वह 4.5 परसȂट िफÎकल डेिफिसट सही नहीं था। 
अगर उस समय भी real  fiscal deficit िनकालत े, तो बहुत सारे under-provisioning थे, 
जैसे फिर्टलाइज़र, Äयूल सिÅसडी, ऑयल बॉन्ड आिद, अगर हम इनको जोड़ देते, तो उनके  
समय fiscal deficit 7 परसȂट से ऊपर जाता। आज वे हमȂ ज्ञान दे रहे हȅ, जबिक उनको अपने 
आपको देखना चािहए। आज जो revenue deficit की बात करते हȅ, तो मȅ उनको बताना चाहूंगा 
िक यूपीए क े समय मȂ वह 3.2 परसȂट था। सर, 2016-17 मȂ िचदÇबरम जी ने यहां पर कह
ा था िक 
हमȂ effective revenue deficit को ज़ीरो परसȂट पर लाने की कोिशश करनी चािहए, जो िक इनके  
समय मȂ 1.8 परसȂट था। मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का अिभनंदन करता हूं िक अगले साल effective 
revenue de
ficit .03 परसȂट होगा, यानी लगभग यह ज़ीरो परसȂट होने वाला है। आप बजट 
उठाकर देखȂगे, तो यह हमȂ देखने को िमलेगा।   
सर, जब CAPEX or capital expenditure की बात करते हȅ, तो क ु ल िमलाकर यह 12.20 
लाख करोड़ का है। अग
र हम देखȂगे तो पूरे बजट का 22.8 परसȂट पूरा क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर मȂ 
खचर् हो रहा है।  अगर लगातार हर बजट से तुलना करȂ, तो यह धीरे-धीरे बढ़ ही रहा है, घट नहीं 
रहा है। यह बताने की आवÌयकता जरूर है िक यूपीए क े समय मȂ अगर 2013-14 मȂ देखȂ, तो 
CAPEX एक्सपȂिडचर 15 परसȂट था। यह आपके  समय मȂ 15 परसȂट होता था, जबिक हमारे समय 
मȂ 22.8 परसȂट है। जब इसमȂ इतनी बड़ी वृिǉ हुई, तो आप क ै से इस पर क्वेÌच
न उठा रहे हȅ!   
सर, अगर हम debt to GDP रेिशयो देखȂ, तो यह अमेिरका का 125 परसȂट है, यूक े का 
101 परसȂट है, चीन का 96 परसȂट है, ģांस का 113 परसȂट है और जापान का 230 परसȂट, लेिकन 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
69

अगर हम भारत का देखȂगे, तो भारत का debt to GDP 55.6 परसȂट है, िजसको 2030 तक 50 
परसȂट तक लाया जाएगा। यह होता है िवǄीय अनुशासन और इस Ģकार से िवǄीय Ģबंधन िकया 
जा रहा है। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इस Ģकार क े अनेकȗ Ģयास िकए गए िक सÎते लोन को 
मोिबलाइज़ िकया जा
ए, यह उसी का नतीजा है िक इस Ģकार से हमको debt to GDP कम देखने 
को िमल रहा है।  
सर, tax to GDP - यह अभी 11.2 परसȂट है, जो िक पहले 10.09 परसȂट होता था। इसका 
कारण यह है िक जो हमारे tax payers हȅ, आम नागिरक हȅ, उनका सरकार पर धी रे-धीरे भरोसा 
बढ़ रहा है और मोदी सरकार पर बहुत भरोसा बढ़ रहा है। मȅ इसका सीधा उदाहरण देता हूं। 
2014-15 मȂ 4.07, मतलब 4 करोड़ िरटन्सर् फाइल होती थी। अगर आप िपछले साल देखȂ, तो यह 
आंकड़ा बढ़कर 9.2 करोड़ हो गया है, यानी दो गुना से अिधक इन्कम टैक्स की िरटन्सर् फाइल हो 
रही हȅ। लोगȗ का इस तरह से िवÌव
ास बढ़ा है। उसी Ģकार से अगर हम डीमेट अकाउंट देखȂ, तो 
डीमेट अकाउंट भी जो पह
ले 2.5 करोड़ थे, अब वे 12 करोड़ अकाउंट हो गए हȅ। हम कह सकते हȅ 
िक लोगȗ का िवÌवास बढ़ा है। लोग टैक्स दे रहे हȅ और इसिलए टैक्स दे रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक उनको 
बहुत सारे िरफॉÇसर् क े माध्यम से सहूिलयतȂ दी गई हȅ।   
सर, अगर हम current account deficit की बात करȂ, तो यह यूपीए की सरकार मȂ 
लगभग 4.8 तक पहुंच गया था।  आज Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ M ake in India  and 
Make for the World क े मंतर् पर हम लोग चल रहे हȅ और उसके  कारण आज रक्षा क्षेतर् मȂ हमारा 
एक्सपोटर् 34 गु ना बढ़ा है। मोबाइल का एक्सपोटर् - जो पहले हम इÇपोटर् करते थे, वहीं आज 
इÇपोटर् नहीं करते, बिÊक 2.9 लाख करोड़ का मोबाइल एक्सपोटर् करते हȅ। इलेक्टर्ॉिनक्स मȂ िकस 
Ģकार से कर्ांित आई है, इसके  संबंध मȂ मȅ  क ु छ कहना चाहता हूं। आज भारत का इलेक्टर्ॉिनक्स क े 
क्षेतर् मȂ 2013-14 से 8 गुना अिधक एक्सपो
टर् हो गया है, जो लगभग 3. 3 लाख करोड़ हो गया है। 
इसी Ģकार से हमारा एक्सपोटर् बढ़ रहा है और सीधा-सीधा अगर आंकड़ȗ मȂ देखȂ, जो इनके  समय 
मȂ लगभग 4.8 परस Ȃट था और थोड़ा कम हो गया होगा, वहीं आज हमारा करȂट अकाउंट 
डेिफिसट है, यह 1 परस Ȃट भी कम 0.6 परस Ȃट है। वह िदन दूर नहीं, जब यह करȂट अकाउंट 
डेिफिसट नह
ीं रहेगा और िजस Ģकार से Ģयास हो रहा है, तो हम 2-3 सालȗ क े अंदर करȂट 
अकाउंट  को बहुत बड़े सरÃलस पर ले जाएंगे। सर, आज फोरेक्स िरज़वर् 709 िबिलयन डालर है, 
जो इनके  सम
य 300 िबिलयन डालर होता था।  
 सर, मȅ जरूर एक बात कहना चाहूंगा िक पूरे िवÌव की िनगाहȂ भारत की ओर हȅ। सभी 
कर् ेिडट रेिंटग एजȂसीज़ से लेकर िवÌव क े जो सभी संगठन हȅ, वे भारत की जो नीित यां हȅ, भारत 
की जो योजनाएं हȅ, भारत की जो कायर् Ģणाली है, उसकी तारीफ कर रहे हȅ। वे देख रहे हȅ िक 
भारत धीरे- धीरे ग्लोबल हब बनता जा रहा है। उसी का नत ीजा देखȂगे, तो एक साल क े अंदर यह 
िरकॉडर् है िक भारत ने 6 एगर्ीमȂट्स िकए। इंिडया-ओमान सीईपीए एगर्ीमȂट हुआ, उसके  बाद 
इंिडया-न्यूजीलȅड ģी टर्ेड एगर्ीमȂट हुआ, िफर इंिडया-यूक े सीईटीए एगर्ीमȂट हुआ, िफर इंिडया-
ईयू ģी टर्ेड एगर्ीमȂट हुआ, अभी जो लेटेÎट एगर्ीमȂट हुआ और सबसे बड़ी इंिडया-यूएस टर्ेड डी
ल 
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

हुई। यह भारत की क्षमता, भारत की सामथ्यर्, भारत की शिƪ को दशार्ता है िक भारत ग्लोबल हब 
बनने जा रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, आज इंÄलेशन … 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You will get an opportunity to respond.  
Ǜी अरुण िंसह: मȅ बताता हूं। उधर वाले बैठे हȅ, आप लोगȗ को इसके  बारे मȂ अगर थोड़ी भी समझ 
हो, तो आप समझȂगे िक अगर यह ģी टर्ेड एगर्ीमȂट हुआ है, तो जो एमएसएमई, जो छोटे-छोटे 
उǏोग हȅ, उनको इससे िकत
ना बड़ा लाभ होने वाला है, वे िकतना एक्सपोटर् करने वाले हȅ। सर, 
यह सीधे-सीधे एÇÃलॉयमȂट से जुड़ता है। 
 सर, अगर आप इंÄलेशन देखȂ, तो इंÄलेशन क े बारे मȂ भी हम सबको मालूम है िक इसी 
सदन मȂ खड़े होकर कांगर्ेस क े िवǄ मंतर्ी कई बा र  बोलते थे, "We are trying to curtail the 
inflation rate, हम पूरी मेहनत कर रहे हȅ।" लेिकन िजतनी बार वे बोलते थे, उतनी बार इंÄलेशन 
बढ़ता चला जाता था। इनके  समय जो महंगाई दर थी, जो इंÄलेशन था, वह 9.49 परसȂट था, अब 
जाकर 2 परसȂट से भी कम महंगाई रेट है। यह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की नीितयȗ क े कारण है और यह 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की उपलिÅध है।  
 सर, अब हम रोड टर्ांसपोटर् की बात करना चाहते हȅ। चूंिक आपने कहा है िक बजट सभी 
मंतर्ालयȗ से जुड़ा हुआ होता है, इसि
लए हम क ु छ मंतर्ालयȗ की चचार् कर देते हȅ। सर, जो रोड 
टर्ांसपोटर् है, इसमȂ कÊपना किरए, इनके  समय 31,302 करोड़ रुपए थे, अब जाकर 3,09,873 
करोड़ रुपए हो गए हȅ, मतलब रोड टर्ांसपोटर् मȂ मोदी सरकार 10 गुना एलोके ट कर रही है! यह 
उपलिÅध है। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... िदिग्वजय जी, इसी क े कारण आप एक्सĢेसवे पर चलते हȅ, इसी क े 
कारण आप वंदे भारत टर्ेन पर चलते हȅ। 
Ǜी उपसभा पित: आप सीट पर बैठे-बैठे न बोलȂ। माननीय िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, आप बड़े सीिनयर 
मेÇबर हȅ, Ãलीज़। 
Ǜी अरुण िंसह: इसी क े कारण नए-नए एयरपोट्सर् बने हȅ। इतना पैसा एलोके ट हो रहा है, तो आप 
लोग ही सबसे अिधक आनंद ले रहे हȅ और आप लोग तार ीफ नहीं कर रहे हȅ, बड़ी बात तो यह है।  
 सर, अब हमारा जो आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय है, इसको भारी-भरकम बजट 
िदया गया है - 85,522 करोड़। इनके  समय यह 1,486 करोड़ रुपए होता था। इसका मतलब यह है 
िक Ģधान मंतर्ी जी चाहते हȅ िक हमारे हर ग
रीब क े पास मकान होना चािहए। 4 करोड़ मकान बन 
गए, लेिकन वे चाहते हȅ िक देश का कोई भी गरीब ऐसा न बचे, िजसके  पास उसका आिशयाना न 
हो, उसका घर न हो। इस बात से यह Ģतीत होता है िक 85,522 करोड़ का बजट इसि लए अलॉट 
िकया गया है िक सभी गरीबȗ क े पास मकान रहे। गरीबȗ को आÌवÎत करने क े िलए इसमȂ इतना 
बड़ा बजट रखा गया है। 
 सर, रेलवे क े संबंध मȂ मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगा िक एक तर ीके  से किहए, तो रेलवे मȂ नई-नई 
टर्ेनȂ चल रही हȅ, नई पटिरयां भी बन रही हȅ और उनका चौड़ीकरण भी हो रहा है। आप कÊपना 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
71

किरए िक रेल क े क्षेतर् मȂ यूपीए क े समय 2013-14 मȂ क ेवल 26 हजार करोड़ रुपए िमलते थे। 26 
हजार करोड़ रुपए मȂ हम क्या करȂगे! हमारे समय मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इसके  िलए 
जो बजट एलोके शन हुआ, वह 2,81,377 करोड़ है। मतलब इसमȂ 11 गु ना वृिǉ हुई है! क्या कोई 
कÊपना कर सकता है िक इन 11 सालȗ मȂ रेलवे का बजट इस Ģक
ार से 11 गुना बढ़ा है! हम कहते 
हȅ िक जब रेलवे तेज चल ती है, तो देश की Ģगित भी तेज हो जाती है, क्यȗिक अिधकांश लोग रेल 
क े माध्यम से यातर्ा करते हȅ। सर, इस बजट मȂ 7 हाई Îपीड रेल चलाने की, उनका िवकास करने 
की घोषणा हुई है। यह आिर्थक Ģगित मȂ एक तर ीके  से चार चांद लगाने का काम करेगा।  
 सर, िडफȂ स क े क्षेतर् मȂ हम सबने देखा िक ऑपरेशन िंसदूर क े अंदर हमारे ही देश मȂ बने 
हुए हिथयार, हमारे ही देश मȂ बने हुए िमसाइल ने िकस Ģकार से पािकÎतान मȂ जाकर तबा ही 
मचाने का काम िकया। सर, रक्षा क्षेतर् मȂ इनके  समय मȂ बजट पहले 2,53,076 करोड़ रुपए होता 
था, अब यह 7,84,678 करोड़ रुपए है और िपछले बजट से इस बजट मȂ देखȂगे, तो भी लगभग 15 
परसȂट बढ़ोतरी की गई है। 
सर, िकसान हमारा अन्नदाता है। अगर कहȂ, तो वह अन्नदाता से बढ़ कर, राÍटर् िनमार्ता 
ही है। अगर सबसे अिधक लोग कहीं काम करते हȅ, तो वे क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ ही काम करते हȅ। उसमȂ भी 
fund का allocation 4.5 या लगभग 5 गुना बढ़ाया गया है। िकसान सÇमान िनिध - आपने एक बार 
loan waiver िकया  और उसके  बारे मȂ बार-बार, कई सालȗ तक बोलने का काम िकया िक हमने 
loan waiver िकया।  यह तो Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ही हȅ, िजन्हȗने अपने खजाने से, सरकार क े 
खजाने से 4.09 लाख करोड़ रुपए सीधे िकसानȗ क े अकाउंट्स मȂ दे िदये हȅ, इसीिलए िकसान 
उनको अपने मसीहा क े रूप मȂ देखते हȅ। आपके  यहां भी िकसानȗ को यह िमल रहा होगा। असली 
बात यह है िक हम क्यȗ चुनाव जीतते हȅ, उसके  यही सब कारण हȅ। जब सीधे िकसान क े, गरीब क े 
अकाउंट मȂ पैसा िमलता है, तो उससे उसका आिर्थक सशƪीकरण होता है और इसके  चलते वह 
Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी को अपने मसीहा क े रूप मȂ देखता है और हमȂ एकतरफा समथर्न देने का काम 
करता है।  यह उसी का नतीजा है।   
सर, हम क ृिष को Ģोत्सािहत करने की कई Ģकार की योजनाएं जो लाए हȅ, उसका नतीजा 
देिखए। आज अन्न का िरकॉडर् उत्पादन 357.77 िमिलयन टन है। इसे आप भी समिझए। आपके  
समय मȂ उत्पादन 251.60 लाख िमिलयन टन था। अगर चावल का उत्पादन देखȂ, तो चावल का 
उत्पादन 150 िमिलयन टन है और इस मामले मȂ िवÌव मȂ नंबर वन है, दूध क े उत्पादन मȂ नंबर वन 
है, मछली क े उत्पादन 140 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है, पशुधन मȂ 195 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है और 
horticulture क े क्षेतर् मȂ 362 िमिलयन टन का उत्पादन हुआ है। 
उपसभापित महोदय, इसी सदन मȂ कांगर्ेस की सरकारȂ खाǏ सुरक्षा की क ेवल बातȂ करती 
थी।  आज मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश क ृिष क े मामले मȂ वैिÌवक नेतृत्वकतार् बन रहा है, जहां 
िकसान की आय और गर्ामीण अथर्ËयवÎथा सशƪ हो रही है और एक साथ चल  
रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
Ǜी उपसभापित: सीट पर बैठ कर नहीं बोलȂ, Ãलीज़। 
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी अरुण िंसह: सर, एक चीज मȅ जरूर बताऊं गा। इन्हȗने मनरेगा क े बारे मȂ बहुत शोर मचाने का 
काम िकया। इन्हȗने मनरेगा क े बारे मȂ कहा िक सरकार उसका बजट खत्म कर रही है, मनरेगा को 
खत्म कर िदया, उसको पैसा नहीं िदया जाएगा। इन्हȗने नीचे बहुत से ĥम फ ैलाने की असफल 
कोिशश की, क्यȗिक जमीन पर लोग इनकी बात को न तो सुन रहे थे और न ही accept कर रहे 
थे। 'G RAM G' क े बारे मȂ हमने बजट मȂ जो देखा, वह आप सबने भी देखा होगा। आप तो     
2013-14 मȂ मनरेगा क े िलए 33 हजार करोड़ रुपये देते थे, क ेवल 33 हजार करोड़ रुपए! अगर 
हमारे इस बजट मȂ देखȂ, तो िपछले साल यह 88 हजार करोड़ रुपए था, इस बार इसे 42 परस Ȅट 
बढ़ाकर करके , 'G RAM G' क े िलए 1 लाख, 25 हजार  करोड़ रुपए िनधार्िरत िकये गये हȅ। जब 
यह मोदी सरकार है, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी कहते हȅ िक जो हमारे क ृिष-Ǜिमक हȅ, उनको हम 
100 िदन की जगह 125 िदन काम करने का अिधकार दे रहे हȅ और इसके  ऊपर, जो उनको काम 
नहीं देगा, उस पर penalty लगाने का काम कर रहे हȅ, तो इसका बजट भी उसी Ģकार से बढ़ाया 
है। अब कांगर्ेस क े और िवपक्ष क े लोग सुन लȂ, आपकी बोलती बंद हो गई है, क्यȗिक इस बजट मȂ 
यह इतना बड़ा allocation है। अब जाकर आप समझाएंगे, तो क ृिष-Ǜिमक आपको दौड़ा देगा। 
इसिलए मेरी सलाह यह है िक आप नीचे जाकर मनरेगा की बात मत कीिजएगा। ये हमȂ जमीनी 
हकीकत, ground reality समझा रहे हȅ!   
सर, यह ठीक है िक जल-जीवन िमशन मȂ िपछली बार थोड़ा कम खचर् हुआ, क्यȗिक 
utilization नहीं आया होगा, लेिकन इस बजट मȂ 67,670 करोड़ रुपए ...(Ëयवधान)... भाई, आप 
यह बताइए िक आप िकस नैितकता क े आधार पर ĢÌन कर रहे हȅ? देश की आजादी क े बाद 
कांगर्ेस क ेवल 3 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ नल से जल पहुंचा पाई थी, क ेवल 3 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ! मोदी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ 12 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ नल से जल पहुंचाने का काम िकया गया है। भाई, आप िकस नैितकता 
से ĢÌन कर रहे हȅ, यह समझ मȂ नहीं आ रहा है। आप जरा अपने िगरेबान मȂ  
झांिकए। ...(Ëयवधान)... हां, ये समझ ही नहीं रहे हȅ।  
सर, हम िवÌव की चौथी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन चुक े हȅ। मȅ MSME क े बारे मȂ जरूर बात करूं गा। 
MSME sector क े लोगȗ से मेरी बात हो रही है। वे बहुत Ģसन्न हȅ, बहुत खुश हȅ, इसिलए िक इस 
बजट मȂ 10,000 करोड़ रुपए का MSME Growth Fund create िकया गया। नंबर वन बात तो यह 
है और नंबर दो, जो Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) है , उसके  माध्यम से 
यह सुिनिÌचत िकया गया है िक उनको payment तुरंत िमल जाएगी, िजससे उनका अपना 
working capital और  मजबूत होगा। इसिलए, GeM से link करते हुए, यह जो Trade 
Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) की announcement की  गई है, यह बहुत बड़ी 
घोषणा है और बहुत बड़ा कदम है। देश मȂ 7 करोड़ 20 लाख रिजÎटडर् एमएसएमईज़ हȅ और देश 
मȂ अगर कोई सबसे अिधक employment देता है, तो उनमȂ एमएसएमईज़ दूसरे नंबर पर है। सर, 
ऐसे ही इनकम टैक्स मȂ भी है, िपछली बार जब 12 लाख रुपए तक की इनकम पर इनकम टैक्स 
छू ट दी गई, तब उसकी बहुत Ģशंसा हुई, उसका लाभ इस साल भी िमल रहा है।  इसमȂ ऐसी और 
भी घोषणाएँ की गई हȅ, जैसे अगर िकसी का एसेसमȂट होता है, उसमȂ टैक्स और पेनÊटी लगाई 
जाती है, तो पेनÊटी पर लगने वाला जो Åयाज है, वह फÎटर् अपील का जब तक िनणर्य नहीं 
आएगा, तब तक वह नहीं लगेगा, यानी उस पर िकसी Ģकार का Åयाज नहीं लगेगा।  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
73

सर, ऐसे ही TCS on Education का है, उसको 5 परसȂट की जगह 2 परसȂट िकया गया 
है और लाखȗ िवǏािर्थयȗ को इसका लाभ िमलने वाला है। क ु ल िमला कर हम यह कह सकते हȅ िक 
इस बजट क े माध्यम से 'Ease of Living' और 'Ease of Doing Business', दोनȗ क े लÑय को 
सुिनिÌचत िकया गया  है। यह बजट Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े उस िवÌवास को साकार करता है। 
'िवकिसत भारत' कोई सपना नहीं है, बिÊक सुिनयोिजत संकÊप है, एक ऐसा भारत जो 
आत्मिनभर्र भी है, समावेशी भी है और िवÌव क े िलए िवÌवास का क Ȃ दर् भी है। सर, मȅ यही कह 
सकता हूँ िक इस बजट क े िलए पूरे देशवासी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का अिभनन्दन कर रहे हȅ। भारत 
'िवकिसत भारत' क े संकÊप को साकार करने क े िलए कहाँ पहुँचने वाला, उसका अनुमान इसी से 
लगाया जा सकता है िक जब 10 सेमीकं डक्टर यूिनट्स लग चुकी हȅ और उसके  साथ-साथ 
'इंिडया सेमीकं डक्टर िमशन 2.0' की घोषणा हुई है, 'डेिडके टेड रेयर अथर् कॉिरडोसर्' - िजसकी 
शुरुआत ओिडशा, क ेरल, आन्धर् Ģदेश और तिमलनाडु मȂ हो रही है। सर, एक तरीके  से किहए िक 
जो हम कभी सोचते नहीं थे िक यह भारत को भी करना चािहए, भारत को भी इस िदशा मȂ बढ़ना 
चािहए था - यह Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इन सब क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, चाहे सेमीकं डक्टर 
मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग यूिनट हो, चारे ' डेिडके टेड रेयर अथर् कॉिरडोसर्' हो और चाहे इसके  साथ-साथ 
अन्य क्षेतर् हȗ, उनमȂ बहुत तेज गित से काम हो रहा है। ...(समय की घंटी)... सर, मȅ पुनः देश क े 
यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का ǭदय से अिभनंदन करता हूँ, सभी देशवासी उनका अिभनन्दन कर रहे 
हȅ और इतना अच्छे बजट देने क े िलए माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का भी ढेर सारा अिभनन्दन करता 
हूँ। बहुत बहुत धन्यवाद! 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद। सुǛी सुिÍमता देव जी।  
MS. SUSHMITA DEV (West Bengal) : Sir, as I stand to speak on the Union Budget of 
2026-27, I would like to thank my party. I have been liste ning to hon. Member of 
Parliament from the BJP who just spoke. But,  what is important about this Budget is 
not what this Budget is actually addressing, what is jarring to my ears and to the 
common man of this country are the issues on  which this Budget is silent. Sir, the 
second thing, which is glaring to my eyes , is huge loopholes when it comes to the 
data that the hon. Finance Minister is depending on to tell us about growth, poverty 
alleviation, etc. Last but not the least, Sir, which we have been saying for the last four 
or five years, is discrimination and disp arity the way you treat the States cannot, 
under any circumstances, ensure the growth of India as a nation. 
Sir, now, I would like to say about some examples of manipulation of data. 
Nine consecutive Budgets hon. Finance Minister has presented matching the number 
of Budgets that the hon. Member and former Finance Minister, Shri Chidambaram, 
has presented. It is history no doubt; but, it is also a history that first time in this 
nation a Finance Minister has given us six Budgets without a Census! लेिकन राजा को 
पता ही नहीं है िक इस देश मȂ Ģजा िकतनी है और उस Ģजा की हालत क्या है। The question I 
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

ask myself now is whether the Census wo rk has started. They are talking about 
digitization and self-enumeration this time. I want to ask the Government that if you 
were planning on self-enumeration, then, what the reason is that you did not start the 
Census where people of India sat in thei r homes during the pandemic and given you 
the data, and the Census should have st arted. It is a shame that the Finance 
Commission of India which devolves funds to  the States on the basis of population 
has been working without a census for six years. Secondly, we hear about 25 crore 
people who have been pulled out of multi-di mensional poverty over a decade. If that 
is true, I am very happy. But I would like to seek a clarification from the hon. Finance 
Minister of India, the NITI Aayog, the think tank: Is it a fact that to declare someone 
non-poor, one of the indicators that have been included in the index is Jan Dhan 
accounts? And 23 per cent of the Jan Dhan accounts are inactive. In the Lok Sabha, 
they have said that 13 crores out of 56 crores accounts are inactive. So why should 
we believe that 25 crore people have been  pulled out of poverty? Now I come to 
GDP. हमको बड़ा गवर् होता है, जब वहाँ से आँकड़े आते हȅ - 7.4 per cent, ये, वो। Why is the 
IMF questioning our base y ear? We have seen different  PIB releases that the 
Biswantah Goldar Committee Report is yet to be ou t where they are recommending 
2022-23 as the base year. So, unless there is a calculation on that basis, why should 
we believe on the GDP and growth data of the country? We are told that we rank as 
the fourth largest economy, but at 166 out of 128 in per capita income. Five trillion 
economy was supposed to happen till 2025, but a research report of the SBI states 
that it is a distant dream till 2028. Silence of the Finance Minister; आप इस बजट मȂ युवा-
शिƪ की बात करते हȅ। आप आँकड़े दीिजए िक जब से मोदी जी की सरकार आई है, तब से आपने 
िकतने युवाओं को रोजगार िदया है। सर, मुझे यह कहने मȂ दुःख होता है िक C MIE data shows 
a dismal record of employment. The PLFS da ta shows that only one in two graduates 
are employable. सर , असम गवनर्मȂट तो यह िंढढोरा पीट रही है िक हम 1.5 लाख सरकारी 
नौकरी दे रहे हȅ, whereas, we have seen that boasting of Government jobs cannot solve 
the problem of unemployment unless there is a growing private sector and huge 
private investment in any State.  I take pride in the fact that the report card that hon. 
Chief Minister of Bengal has given to ever y household of Bengal says that in her 
tenure, unemployment in Bengal went down by 40 per cent.    
Now I come to inequality. This Budget speech is silent on inequality, whereas, 
the scathing World Inequality Report-2026 tells us that India is one of the highest in 
the world and 100 years high means worse than the colonial era.  Sir, the rupee is 
falling. मोदी जी मनमोहन िंसह जी को रुपये क े बारे मȂ क्या कहते थे, उसको बोलने की जरूर त 
नहीं है।  वे बार-बार पीछे ताकते हȅ। I have a simple question on ‘Har Ghar Jal’. On 1 st 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
75

February, 2024, when the interim Budget wa s announced by hon. Finance Minister, 
she allocated Rs.70,000 crores because Prime Minister mentioned about, ‘Har Ghar 
Jal’ from the Red Fort. It is shocking that soon after the General Elections are over in 
2014, the Central Government simply retracts their commitment. After every State sits 
with the Central Government and makes an action plan, including top officers of the 
State and the Government of India, this Go vernment reneged on its promise. This is 
nothing short of a financial £. Thousands of contractors, today, are owing money. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The word £  is unparliamentary.  
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव: सर, £ तो  CrPC मȂ भी है! Anyway, now I come to the most potent issue 
which is discrimination against the States. सर, हम बार-बार बोल रहे हȅ िक इस सरकार ने 
बंगाल का 2 लाख करोड़ रुपया रोक िदया। वह कहती है, करÃशन है, ये है, वो है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूँ िक NREGS का 52,000 करोड़ बाकी है। ...(Ëय वधान )... ममता दीदी पीछे 
नहीं हटीं।  
She has given 50 days of wage employ ment under Karmashree Scheme with 
her own ability. Ģधान  मंतर्ी आवास योजना का जो पैसा रोका, दीदी ने बंगाल क े लोगȗ को 
वंिचत नहीं िकया।  She gave Banglar Bari. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You will get the opportunity to speak. …(Interruptions)… 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव: सर, जल-जीवन िमशन, िजसको इस सरकार ने नही िकया, वहीं ममता दीदी 
ने लोगȗ को ‘जल ÎवÃनो’ Îकीम दी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. You will get your opportunity to speak.  
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव: सर, मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूं िक, today, when you look at the 
performance of a Stat
e and the debt-to-GSDP ratio, आपको यह याद रखना चािहए। जब 
बंगाल का debt to GSDP ratio देखȂगे, तब आप लोगȗ को यह याद रखना पड़ेगा िक this is no t 
a double engine Government. This is Mamata Didi’s Government and despite 
deprivation, Mamata Di has delivered on every promise that the Central Government 
should have.  …( Interruptions)…  सर, मȅ असम से आती हूं, इसिलए असम पर दो शÅद कहना 
चाहती हूं। The recent CAG Report has been scathing against the Assam Government's 
Budget of 2023-24.  Sir, A ssam Government has taken a debt of Rs.1,50,000 crore. 
Mamta didi's debt is because  of your deprivation.  …( Interruptions)… Sir, after taking 
a debt, he is giving Rs.1200 here and Rs.500 0 there, I would like to say that it is 
shocking that the CAG is saying that eco nomic spending has reduced by 7.52 per 
                                                            
£ Exupnged as ordered by the Chair. 
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

cent. I come to an even more important question, Sir. Hon. Finance Minister has 
given Rs.6,000 crores to the Registrar Genera l of India for Census. I thank her for it.  
What is worrying me along with the Census is NPR. NPR is a precursor to NRC. After 
Rs.1600 crores was spent by th e Registrar General of India on NRC, it was a biggest 
disappointment, AN useless and futile exer cise that hon. Home Minister of India 
milked for election-after-election. But, till today, we don't have a solution. मȅ इस 
सरकार से कहना चाहती हूं िक the backdoor NRC that you are doing through SIR, is 
going to backfire on you. And, I want the Ministers, this Government to say, असम और 
बंगाल मȂ िकतने घुसपैिठये पकड़े हȅ, आंकड़े ज़रूर बताइएगा। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ आपका 
धन्यवाद करते हुए मȅ अपना भाषण समाÃत करती हूं।    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri P. Wilson. 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, Dr. Ambedkar said, ‘The test of a good 
Government is not how much revenue it collects, but how it spends and whom it 
benefits.’ And, this Budget would be Dr. Ambedkar's worst fear. It doesn't benefit 
the farmer, the worker, the graduate, the entrepreneur and certainly not the States. It 
buries the federal spirit of our Constitution . We are told this is  a Budget for Viksit 
Bharat. Nothing can be further from the truth. The Government projects a nominal 
GDP growth of 10 per cent wi th a total expenditure of Rs . 53.47 lakh crores and a 
fiscal deficit target of 4.3 per cent.   
Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, we are all ve ry concerned with India's debt trap, 
which is on a deadly spiral. India's debt has risen to Rs.215 trillion, approximately 56 
per cent of the GDP, and there is no clear plan in place even after 16 years of BJP rule 
to reduce debt. There is no de nying of the fact that debt is an engine for growth, but 
debt has to lead to income expansion or  capacity building. You cannot borrow to pay 
your earlier debts with interest payments accounting for nearly one-fourth of Union 
Government's expenditure and around 40 per cent of the revenue receipts for 2026-
27. The Government seems clueless on ho w to escape this debt trap. The hon. 
Finance Minister has spoken about the fis cal consolidation, but is there any real 
progress? The fiscal deficit is projected to dip only slightly from 4.4 per cent of GDP 
this year to 4.3 per cent next year and th e Center's debt-GDP ratio to 55.6 per cent 
from 56.1 per cent. At this pace, it will ta ke decades to get debt -GDP ratio down to 
the 40 per cent targeted by the NK Singh Committee. The BJP loves to attack Tamil 
Nadu Government on its debt but, at least,  our hon. Chief Minister’s Dravidian Model 
Government is borrowing to build schools, ho spitals, roads, things that would lead to 
tangible benefit. I do not see that with the Union Budget.                             
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
77

Sir, the entire nation is very concerned about this trade deal  with the USA that 
Capitol Hill is rejoicing, but, we are yet to hear about this in detail from Raisina Hills. 
First of all, we are all very  unhappy with the abject surrender to the US. India is a 
proud nation and civilization. This weaponization of tariffs should not have pressured 
the Government into submission. Secondly , how have we committed to $500 billion 
of American exports in five years? The to tal US-India bilateral goods trade was just 
$132.13 billion in 2025. Now, you have co mmitted to purchasing $100 billion every 
year from America. Who consumes this? Which domestic products do the US goods 
replace? We have seen media reports that we  are eliminating or reducing tariffs on 
the U.S. made industrial goods, foods and ag riculture, but the U.S. will continue an 
18 per cent tariff on textiles, leather goods,  organic chemical goods originating from 
India. Is this fair? Why have we agreed to this obviously one-sided trade deal that will 
cause irreparable hardships to our domest ic manufacturers and fa rmers? The impact 
of the US tariffs on the textile industries in India, especially, Tamil Nadu, is terrible. Far 
from compensating them for the loss suffered  over the past few decades due to this 
abrupt tariff that saw exports being put on  hold, the new trade d eal’s uncertainty is 
adding to their stress.  
Sir, one of the Prime Minister's pet scheme is Atmanirbhar Bharat. I hope the 
BJP Government remembers this slogan and the ‘lion’ they proudly unveiled as the 
symbol for ‘Make in India.’ Has the ferocious lion become a pet cat in front of the US? 
What happens to our Indian-made goods? Sir, the Union Government has to disclose 
the specifics to this august House and to the nation so that the farmer, the business 
owner and the entrepreneur knows how to plan his business in the coming years.  
Sir, India has one of the highest tax rates in the world. The continuation of dual 
tax regimes with differing exemption limits, rates and rebate structures has increased 
confusion rather than clarity, particularly due to denial of marginal relief under the old 
regime and lack of specific special relief fo r senior citizens under the new regime. The 
withdrawal of savings-linked deductions is discouraging long-term savings and 
burdening taxpayers who made commitments based on earlier incentives. Procedural 
inefficiencies persist, including long time lines for rectification, condonation, and 
disposal of petitions both in the Income Tax Act and GST causing hardships through 
delayed relief and coercive recoveries.  
Sir, the Union needs to create more benches of the IT AT and GSTAT and 
appoint more members. Businesses canno t spend years before courts with 
uncertainty. If the cases are decided one way or the other, they may make provisions 
78
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

for liability and move on. But uncertainty kills the business. Sir, at this time, I want to 
ask the Union Government through this au gust House: What happened to all tax 
evaders who fled abroad, whom you promised  to bring back to India and collect the 
arrears? They are still enjoying their life abroad, whereas taxpayers' money is used to 
waive off the loans of their companies.  
Now let us look at the infrastructure, which the Government proudly calls the 
‘crown jewel’ of this Budget. They announ ced Rupees 12.2 lakh  crores for capital 
spending -- Rupees 3.1 lakh  crores for roads, Rupees 2.8 lakh crores for Railways 
and big promises for new economic regions.  It sounds impressive, but the real 
question is simple. Where is the execution ? Year after year, projects do not even 
spend the full money allocated. However, this Budget keeps pouring money into 
flashy mega projects like the Bullet Trains and Freight Corridors while ignoring basic, 
sustainable city planning. Schemes like AMRUT and Smart Cities get no fresh 
funding, just extensions.  
And, let us talk about the fairness. This  infrastructure push has become anti-
federal and politically biased. The hon. Ra ilway Minister claims that Tamil Nadu’s 
railway allocation has increased 7.5 times since 2014 compared to UPA regime and 
repeats it as if it is doing us a favor. Bu t, look at the reality. The national Railway 
Budget has grown 25 times since 2014 while  Tamil Nadu gets only 7.5 times. 
Compare this with other States. Gujarat – there is a 29 times increase; Delhi – there 
is a 27 times increase; Chhattisgarh – there is a 24 times increas e; Madhya Pradesh 
- 23 times increase; Maharashtra  - 20 time s increase and Uttar Pradesh - 18 times 
increase. Even today, the Union Governme nt has not approved the Coimbatore and 
Madurai Metro Rail projects, which are critical  for our growing cities . This is the real 
problem with this Budget; it favors spectacle over real needs, politics over people and 
Central control over federal fairness. Infrastr ucture is being used as a political tool, 
not as a means to build the nation equally.  
3.00 P.M.                                                                  
Let me now turn to agriculture and rura l India. The Budget allocates Rs. 1.63 
lakh crores. The Government speaks about th e artificial intelligen ce in farming under 
Bharat-VISTAAR and new schemes for cash ew, cocoa and fisheries. But farmers 
across India have been asking one basic question for years. Where is the legal 
guarantee for the Minimum Supp ort Price? Farmers' real incomes are not rising but 
corporates are being pushed into agricu lture value chains. MSMEs, which actually 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
79

create more jobs, are left behind. This Bu dget lacks the specific announcement that 
the MSME industries expected. I request the creation of Emerge ncy Relief Fund to 
protect MSMEs from natural disasters, pandemics, and foreign force majeures like 
tariff. Manufacturing jobs are still stuck at 12 per cent of the total employment, yet 
there is no serious labour reform or skill-to-job plan.  
Health gets Rs. 1.06 crores with PM-J AY at Rs. 9,500 crores and some drug 
duty cuts. These are far fr om enough. Funds and Sche mes like PM-ABHIM remain 
unused because of the digital gaps and planning failures. Trauma centers are 
promised, but access remains uneven. Gender and child welfare allocations fall short. 
The National Health Policy, 2017 set a target of increasing total public health 
expenditure to 2.5 per cent of GDP by 2025.  Spending, however, remains at 1.7 per 
cent of the GDP as per the Economic Survey, 2025. Our hon. Deputy Chief Minister, 
Mr. Udhayanidhi Stalin, has been remindin g the BJP for the last five years that 
Madurai, AIIMS has not been complete d and AIIMS, Madurai classrooms are 
operating from Ramnad district. It looks lik e first batch of students graduating from 
Madurai, AIIMS would graduate without even  looking at their campus. Spending on 
‘Health’ is not charity. You are investing in your citizens and the country will reap the 
benefits. 
‘Education and Youth’ are mentione d, but where are the jobs? Youth 
unemployment remains high, and internship s are offered without any guarantee for 
employment. You promised that two-crore jobs will be created every year. It has 
been 12 years. Where are the 24-crore jobs created? You promised doubling farmers’ 
income, but you did nothing to increase this. There is increase in inequality with top 1 
per cent holding 40 per cent wealth.  
 Sir, this Budget on social welfare and the previous years’ budgets have shown 
an alarming neglect for the social welfare se ctors. One thing is the low allocations but 
even worse is the terribly low utilization of allocated funds. This Budget has allocated 
18 per cent of expenditure to the social s ector. Taken as a share of GDP, the social 
sector has received 2.5 per cent lower th an 2014-15 when this NDA Government 
presented its first Budget. In 2024-25, the latest year for which the actual spending 
data are available, social sector spending fell to an all-time low in a decade of 17 per 
cent of total expenditure with only Rs. 7.7 lakh crores spent. Th e Ministry of Labour 
and Employment, which funds social security  schemes for workers such as pensions 
for the industrial workers, unorganised workers under the Pradhan Mantri Sharam 
Yogi Maandhan, and also fo r shopkeepers, retail trad ers, and self-employment 
80
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

persons under the Pradhan Mantri Karam Yogi Maandhan, spent just over half of this 
Budget. Everyone knows how much the BJP detests the word ‘Socialist’ in our 
Preamble merely because of who put it there. But such consistent neglect of such 
social sector is catastrophic for India's less-fortune citizens.  
Sir, with regard to the increase in a llocation for Defence, I request the hon. 
Finance Minister to focus on the human aspect of our Armed Forces. Though the 
man-machine balance in warfare has tilted  towards technology, our men and women 
in uniform are the most important part of the Armed Forces. I request the hon. 
Finance Minister to approve the pendin g claims and grievances of the armed 
personnel pertaining to rationalisation of pay and ‘One Rank One pension’.  
Sir, we are on the cusp of  Artificial Intelligence Revolution. Artificial Intelligence 
is about to change the way humans live. We are lagging behind in funding Artificial 
Intelligence and data sectors. I would like to  see more from the Union Government on 
energy transition, semiconduc tors and artificial intelligence. While I note the Budget 
allocation for Semiconductor 2.0 and tax holi day till 2047 for all foreign investors who 
invest in India data centers, this is far from enough. We have an international image as 
a tech country. We should back Indian tech and India data industry more.  
Sir, I am also pained to note the paltry allocation of Rs. 4,000 crores to Law 
and Justice Ministry. At the same time, Gove rnment is spending Rs. 2 lakh crores on 
Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train. 
Sir, establishing and spending on courts is not luxury. It is a fundamental need 
to preserve a democratic system of government with rule of law at its heart. Access to 
speedy justice is a Fundamental Right. Wh en litigants obtain quick justice, it 
contributes to the progress of the nation. Several courts and tribunals are languishing 
without judges, staff and basic infrastructure . I request the hon. Finance Minister to 
significantly increase the allocation of funds to the Ministry of Law and Justice. Sir, I 
wish to quote a Thirukkural at this juncture. & “King is able to acquire wealth, to lay it 
up, to guard it and to contribute it. ”  For the benefit of Memb ers from other States, it 
means, ‘to build, to earn, to guard, to preserve and to share -  one who masters this 
cycle alone is worthy to govern.’  
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil.  
 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
81

So, sharing is an important part of gove rnance, especially in a Republic with a 
federal structure. For several years, Tam il Nadu has consistently argued that the 
Union Government's approach to tax devolution has systematically disadvantaged the 
developed and high performing States, including Tamil Nadu. Once again, the 
demand raised by many States that the shar es of the States in the divisible pool of 
taxes be increased from 41 per cent to 50 per cent has been ignored. The share 
remains frozen at 41 per cent. In contrast, the 16 th Finance Commission reduces 
allocation by 2.5 per cent for controlling po pulation as allocation for demographic 
performance reduced from 12.5  per cent to 10 per cent. Further, a contrast in tax 
devolution towards North and South is clear .  Uttar Pradesh alon e received 17.62 per 
cent of the divisible pool. Bihar receive d 9.95 per cent. Madhya Pradesh received 
7.35 per cent. These States together account for 35 per cent of tax devolution. Now, 
compare this with the entire Southern regi on. All the South Indian States together 
received only 17 per cent despite contributi ng approximately 31 per cent to India's 
GDP. What makes this more concer ning is that even when the 16 th Finance 
Commission acknowledged the role of States  in driving India's economic growth, the 
final allocation still fails to adequately recognize Tamil Nadu's contribution.  
Sir, you normally place your best bats man as the opening batsman. If Tamil 
Nadu is your best performer, you should cherish and showcase the State, not 
undercut it at every turn. We have delivered  11.4 per cent growth last year. Why this 
discrimination? Tamil Nadu, which has the second largest State economy and plays a 
vital role in the nation’s growth, has been allotted only  4.097 per cent tax devolution 
for the coming five years. The con cerns do not end here. Consider the Jal Jeevan 
Mission. Tamil Nadu has repeatedly pointed out that Rs. 3,112 crores requested 
under the Scheme has not been released. This, when the Jal Jeevan Mission  has 
spent only Rs. 17,000 crore of Rs. 60,000 cr ore estimated by the Budget of 2025-26.  
So, the Union is allocating the funds on pape r just to give a media byte that such a 
large sum has been allocated, but it is not spent and, more importantly, not devolved 
to the States. Even more troubling is a sharp reduction in the national allocation. From 
Rs. 67,000 crore in the Budget Estimates to only Rs. 17,000 crore in the Revised 
Estimates, this raises serious concern about the future of a scheme that directly 
affects drinking water access. Similarl y, allocations for rural roads on the Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana have been reduced from Rs. 90,000 crore to Rs. 11,000 
crore. The allocation to rural housing sche me has dropped from Rs. 35,832 crore to 
Rs. 32,500 crores. And perhaps the most st riking example is the PM internship 
scheme announced with great enthusiasm last year at Rs. 10,831 crores, but reduced 
82
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

in the Revised Estimates to rupees Rs. 526 cr ores. Such a drastic reduction inevitably 
raises doubts about the planning, execution and seriousness of the intent. Yet, none 
have been announced. Funds of  Rs. 3,548 crore under the Samagra Siksha Scheme 
remain withheld for refusing to accept Hi ndi imposition. The Rs . 3,112 crore pending 
under Jal Jeevan Mission  remains unaddressed. As our hon. Chief Minister and 
Deputy Chief Minister have repeatedly said, you have not even mentioned Tamil Nadu 
in the Budget. There is no new proj ect, no significant new commitment. Perarignar 
Anna once said, &“North Indian businessmen has empowered themselves in 
establishing industries by using raw materi als from iron, steel and cotton. Thereby, 
they have been empowered to dominate us. National movement has become their 
movement. They receive huge amount from the Government for these activities. 
Capitalism and nationalism has joined hands with each other. Now, religion also has 
joined this nexus. People who have real fr eedom spirit should intend to break down 
this nexus”... 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is for all. सभी लोगȗ से एक आगर्ह है िक आप Îपीच रीड 
नहीं करȂ। You have to... 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, every Budget is an  opportunity for political rhetoric. The 
Budget itself should be a fair, impartial document in keeping with the constitutional 
ethos. Under the BJP, the Union Budget ha s become a political tool to punish the 
States that do not elect the NDA and reward  States with NDA. Such misuse of the 
Budget is disastrous for the country. If Arti cle 14 of the Constitution is applied to the 
present Budget, it will be quashed in a moment, as it is highly discriminatory in terms 
of allocation. Madam, what you give to Tamil Nadu will come  back to you.  Since you 
have not given anything, nothing will come back to you. Tamil Nadu is a jewel on 
India's crown. We are your best performing State.  We have just crossed Pakistan's 
GDP. Through this august House, I call upon the hon. Prime Minister and hon. 
Finance Minister to be fair to Tamil Nadu. Thank you, very much.                
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister. 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE  
AFFAIRS (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): I w ill come back to this House and 
reply for every one of the speeches. Since an absolutely incorrect statement has been 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil.  
 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
83

made by a very senior advocate of the Su preme Court, I just want to say one  
thing. …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: She has the right to reply.  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Shri Digv ijaya Singh targets a lot of comments 
on me. …(Interruptions)… But I want to te ll him something; he is a very senior 
Member. …(Interruptions)… If he is allowed to sit and give commentary, I am allowed 
to stand, if you permit me to say a commentary. Among many other things that hon. 
Member Wilson read out, rather than spok e, one thing stood out for me. He said, 
“Tamil Nadu has no new projects given. ” Absolutely wrong! I just count at the tip of 
my finger, four things, ready. What is the ra re earth corridor? Is it not going to Tamil 
Nadu? Every district will get one girls hostel . Is it not for Tamil Nadu? Fishermen are 
getting a benefit to go into the deep sea and also their products to be treated as an 
export if they go from the high sea to any other destination. Is it not going to benefit 
Tamil Nadu? Is the Coconut Scheme not going to benefit farmers in Tamil Nadu who 
are keeping coconut trees? On allied health , where we are saying, a medical hub can 
be created on a challenge mode, Tamil Nadu can bid for it and can get it.  So, I have 
just, off the cuff, said a few things. Sweepin g statements like this without any basis, 
linked with the Budget, which has been presen ted only eight days ago, is not right at 
all. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. माननीय सदÎयगण, Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय 
सदÎयगण, आप सबसे यह अपेक्षा की जाती है िक िरटन Îपीच पढ़ने क े बजाय आप अपने 
Ãवाइंट्स कहȂ। Do not read. You are not supposed to read your written statements. 
Now, Shri Raghav Chadha. 
Ǜी राघव चǀा (पंजाब): सर, अक् सर  देखा जाता है िक जब िवǄ मंतर्ी जी बजट पेश करती हȅ, तो 
रूिंलग ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया चेयर पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, मȅ बजट पर बोल रही हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर आप समय दȂगे, 
तो हम बगैर पेपर देखे बो
लȂगे और अगर समय नहीं होगा, तो पेपर पढ़ना पड़ेगा। 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप बहुत सीिनयर सदÎया हȅ। समय पाटीर् दलȗ क े ǎारा बीएसी मीिंटग मȂ 
आवंिटत होता है। यह चेयर तय नहीं करती है, इस बात को आप जरूर जानती हȗगी। राघव चǀा 
जी ...(Ëय
वधान)... 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, मȅ आपको नहीं कह रही हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
84
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, अक्सर देखा जाता है जब िवǄ मंतर्ी बजट पेश करती हȅ, तो रूिंलग 
कोएिलशन क े जो एमपीज़ हȅ, जो टर्ेज़री बȂचेज पर बैठते हȅ, वे सरकार की तारीफ करते हȅ और 
कहते हȅ िक इस बजट से भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ कर्ांित आ जाएग ी और िवपक्ष मȂ जो एमपीज़ बैठे 
हȅ, वे अक्सर िंनदा करते हȅ और कहते हȅ िक िकसान की कमर तोड़ दी, बहुत महंगाई हो गई, 
अमीर और अमीर हो रहा है और गरीब और गरीब हो रहा है। सर, मȅ आज Ģयास करूं गा िक इस 
बजट का एक ऑÅजेिक्टव एनािलिसस करूं  और अपना क ंÎटर्िक्टव िकर्िटिसįम आपके  माध्यम से 
िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को दूं। The title of my s
peech is ‘The good, the bad and the way forward’. 
In my speech are four good things that I found  in this Budget, four  bad things that I 
found in this Budget and four innovative suggestions to the hon. Finance Minister. 
The first good thing that I found in the Budg et is that there was an increase in the STT 
for derivative trading. यूजुअली, इस िवषय को लेकर सरकार की िंनदा हुई, मािर्कट्स भी िगरी, 
लेिकन मेरा यह मानना है िक इस कदम से speculative trading, यानी  िक सƺा टर्ेिंडग समाÃ
त 
होगी या कम होगी। जो 90 परसȂट िरटेल इन्वेÎटर एफएंडओ सेक्टर मȂ, Future and Options क े 
चलते जुआ खेलता, नुकसान भुगतता है, उसमȂ िरटेल इन्वेÎटर की Ģोटेक्शन का एक माध्यम बन 
सकता है। मȅ इसी क े साथ-साथ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को याद िदलाना चाहूंगा िक एसटीटी का genesis 
क्या है? एसटीटी का जन्म कब हुआ? एसटीटी को हमारे सीिनयर कॉलीग, Ǜी पी. िचदÇबरम 
जब फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर थे, तब उन्हȗने इंटर्ोǹूस िकया। It was introduced to replace long-
term capital gains tax on equities. 
जब Long-T
erm Capital Gains Tax on Equities ज़ीरो था, तब STT को लाया गया िक 
वह trades पर  एक simple, upfront levy होगी, regardless of profit and loss. लेिकन अब 
सरकार ने Long-Term Capital Gains Tax भी लगा िदया और STT भी लगा िदया, िजससे 
उसने retail investors और तमाम investors को एक Ģकार से disincentivise िकया। मȅ सरकार 
क े िलए एक सुझाव लाया हूं, िजससे long-term household earnings बढ़Ȃगी, wealth creation 
होगा और wealth parki
ng real estate and gold क े सेक्टर से िनकल कर equities मȂ आएगी, 
speculative trading और कम होगी और investors का long-term investment behaviour 
बढ़ेगा। वह यह है िक Long-Term Capital Gains Tax on equities should be made nil in this 
country for individual investors. दुिनया क े कई ऐसे देश हȅ, िजनके  अंदर Lo ng-Term 
Capital Gains Tax, खास तौर पर equities पर, शून्य है, जैसे िक िÎवटजरलȅड, िंसगापुर, यूएई, 
न्यूजीलȅड, हांगकांग, कतर और मलेिशया। मȅ चाहूंगा िक जब STT बढ़ाया जा रहा है, तो इसी 
बजट मȂ ही Long-Term Capital Gains Tax को ज़ीरो िकया जाए। 
 सर, दूसरा, जो मȅ सरकार क े बजट को acknowledge करना चाहूंगा, वह यह है िक 
CAPEX का जो expenditure allocati
on होता है, उसमȂ एक बढ़ोतरी देखी गई। जहां िवǄीय वषर् 
2018-19 मȂ मातर् 3 लाख करोड़ CAPEX था, वह इस िवǄीय वषर् मȂ 12 लाख करोड़ तक पहुंचा है, 
which is 4.4 per cent of the GDP, which is a good step.   It will have a multiplier effect, 
and it will prioritize asset creation. लेिकन इसके  साथ-साथ सरकार 5 साल मȂ क्या-क्या 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
85

CAPEX कौन-कौन से क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ खचर् करने जा रही है, उसका एक Åयौरा देना चािहए, तािक 
Ģाइवेट सेक्टर भी इस CAPEX क े खचȃ को match कर सके । 
  Sir, the third thing, which we found in the Speech of the hon. Finance 
Minister, is that there was a relative rest raint in making budgetary announcements for 
the election-bound States. अक्सर िवǄ मंतर्ी का भाषण सुन कर आप बता सकते हȅ िक कौन 
से राज्यȗ मȂ चुनाव होने जा रहा है। इस Îपीच मȂ उन्हȗने थोड़ा सा restrain exercis
e िकया है, 
िजसे मȅ acknowledge करता हूं। 
 सर, आिखरी अच्छी चीज, जो इस बजट मȂ नजर आई, वह यह थी िक NRI की 
investment limit मȂ enhancement हुई। लेिकन मȅ बता दूं िक जब FIIs  ने, foreign investors ने, 
foreign portfolio investors ने इस देश क े बाजार से पैसा िनकाल िलया और िपछले एक िवǄीय 
वषर् मȂ 23 िबिलयन  िनकाला, तब जाकर सरकार जागी और सरकार ने NRIs क े िलए equity 
market का दरवाजा खोल कर उनकी investment limit को 5 परसȂट से बढ़ा िदया। इसमȂ कोई 
दो राय नहीं है िक इससे 32 million NRI investors को भारत
ीय बाजार मȂ पैसा डालने का मौका 
िमलेगा। लेिकन इसी क े साथ-साथ, सरकार को इस पर भी गौर फरमाना चािहए िक क्यȗ foreign 
investors भारत से पैसा िनकाल-िनकाल कर बाजार को छोड़ कर जा रहे हȅ। 
 
Sir, now, I come to the bad part of the Budget. The first thing is the debt-to-
GDP crisis. सरकार ने और debt लेने क े िलए, कजर् लेने क े िलए इस बजट मȂ formula ही बदल 
िदया। पहले सरकार जब debt लेती थी, तो old FRBM rules क े तहत 3 per cent of GDP तक 
का fresh debt लेती थी। इस बजट मȂ सरकार ने उस formula को बदल कर कहा है िक सरकार 
का total debt GDP का 50 परस Ȃट होगा और उस सीमा मȂ हम debt लȂगे। यानी they want to 
play on the denominator effect. F
or example, अगर एक साल हमारा GDP 12 परस Ȃट से 
grow करता है, तो उस साल सरकार खूब सारा debt लेकर सरकार पर कजर् लाद सकती है, 
िजससे fiscal deficit 4.5-5-6.5 परसȂट तक भी पहुंच सकता है। सर, इसी क े साथ-साथ, मȅ 
बताना चाहूंगा िक आज सरकार कहत
ी है िक हमारा debt-to-GDP ratio 56 per cent है, 
लेिकन यह गलत है, क्यȗिक बहुत सारे off balance sheet items हȅ , िजन्हȂ सरकार debt मȂ 
िदखाती ही नहीं है, जैसे िक FCI bonds, OMC bonds, fertilizer, NHAI, NFSS. यानी िक 
सरकार क े ऊपर तमाम तर
ीके  क े ऐसे कजȃ हȅ, िजन्हȂ सरकार अपनी balance sheet मȂ नहीं 
िदखाती है। सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से यह request करना चाहूंगा िक देश का कजर् क ै से 
और न बढ़े, वह इस पर काम करे, न िक और कजर् लेने क े िलए हम debt-to-GDP क े formula 
क े ratios
 बदल कर Åयाज पर और कजर् लेने का Ģयास करȂ।  
 सर, दूसरी िदक्कत जो इस बजट मȂ नजर आई, वह यह है िक Income-Tax slab मȂ कोई 
change नहीं हुआ। हर साल जब देश का आम आदमी िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की बज ट की Îपीच सुनता है, 
तो वह इसिलए नहीं सुनता िक PLI का क्या investment होगा, कौन सा कॉिरडोर बन रहा है, 
बिÊक देश का आम आदमी, salaried class इसिलए बजट की Îपीच सुनता है िक क्या उसके  
86
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

अंदर slab मȂ कोई revision होगा; हमȂ जो standard deduction िमलता है, क्या वह बढ़ेगा। 
लेिकन इस बार बजट मȂ देश का आम आदमी, खास तौर पर देश का middle class disappoint 
हुआ। Already, there has been a stagnation in the salaries. Inflation 6.8 per cent पर 
खड़ा है, लेिकन उसके  बावजूद हमने इस बार slab मȂ या standard deduction मȂ कोई change 
नहीं देखा। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िवǄ मंतर्ी जी से request करना चाहूंगा िक आप इसी बजट मȂ 
announcement करȂ िक salaried class क े िलए standard deduction,
 जो 75 हजार रुपए है, 
उसे बढ़ा कर 1.5 लाख रुपए िकया जाएगा। 
 Sir, the third problem that is there with the Budget is that there is no relief for 
the middle-class. After a very long time in  India’s history, the personal Income-Tax 
collection was more than the corporate income tax collection. 
यानी िक इंिडिवजुअÊस ने जो इनक म  टैक्स भरा, वह लगभग 11 लाख करोड़ क े आसपास 
भरा और कÇपिनयȗ ने, कॉरपोरेट ने जो इनकम टैक्स भरा, वह लगभग 9.8 लाख करोड़, यानी 
िक मैिक्समम टैक्स आपको इंिडिवजुअÊस क े इनकम टैक्स से िमल रहा है और िमिडल क्लास वह 
टैक्स भर रह
ा है। आज वह दौर आ गया है िक हम िमिडल क्लास को अपिलÄट करȂ, िमिडल 
क्लास को पैÇपर करȂ, नहीं तो िमिडल क्लास एक सȅडिवच की तरह िरच क्लास और पूअर क्लास 
क े बीच मȂ दबता चला जा रहा है। सर, rising cost pressures क े चलते िपछले िवǄीय वषर् मȂ 
िमिडल क्लास ने देखा िक उसके  एजुक ेशन क े खचȃ मȂ 8 परसȂट की बढ़ोतरी हुई, healthcare 9 
परसȂट महंगा हुआ, रȂट 7 परसȂट, फ ू ड 6 परसȂट और टर्ांसपोटर् 5 परसȂट  महंगा हुआ। माननीया 
फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर से मेरी िरक्वेÎट यह है िक वे इनकम टैक्स मȂ िरयायत देकर या तो िमिडल 
क्लास को कोई िरलीफ दȂ और अग
र इनकम टैक्स मȂ िरयायत नहीं दे सकती हȅ, तो उसकी 
सेिंवग्स और इन्वेÎटमȂट्स पर उसे बेिनिफट दȂ, उसे incentives दȂ, ताि क वह ज्यादा बचत करे, 
ज्यादा wealth creation कर पाए।  
Fourth problem in this Budget that I found was the budgetary allocation to 
health sector, which is low and which, certainly, needs a relook. आज हमने अपने total 
Government Expenditure का 2 per cent हेÊथ को एलोके ट िकया है, जो लगभग 1 लाख 
करोड़ क े आसपास है। National Health Policy, 2017 बताती है और सरकार का अपना यह 
objective रहा है, goal रहा है - Spending on public health  should be 2.5 per cent of 
GDP. आज हम 2026 मȂ खड़े हȅ। हमा
री पिÅलक हेÊथ पर spending मातर् 0.5 per cent of GDP 
है।  हम अपने लÑय से कोसȗ मील दूर हȅ। जहां यूएस मȂ 18 per cent of GDP healthcare पर खचर् 
होता है। यूक े मȂ 12 परस Ȃट, जमर्नी मȂ 13 परस Ȃट और Îवीडन, नीदरलȅड, डेनमाकर् , जापान तथा 
Îपेन मȂ 1
0 per cent of GDP खच र् होता है, क्यȗिक वे देश जानते हȅ िक 'जान है, तो जहान है', 
लेिकन हमारे देश मȂ मातर् 5 per cent of GDP हम  अपनी हेÊथ पर खचर् करते हȅ। इसके  चलते 
आलम यह है िक अगर आप सरकारी अÎपताल मȂ चले जाइए,  which is called the backbone
 
of India’s healthcare, वहां पर आपको पुरानी जजर्र िबिंÊडग्स िमलȂगी, massively under-
staffed hospital िमलेगा, over-worked doctors िमलȂगे, पॉपुलेशन क े िहसाब से बेड्स नहीं 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
87

िमलȂगे, जांच क े िलए मशीनȂ नहीं हȅ, दवाइयȗ की कमी है और अगर इलाज की, ऑपरेशन की डेट 
िमल भी जाए, तो वह डेट इतनी दूर होती है िक तब तक मरीज चल बसता है।   
Sir, the reality is that Covid made us realize this and it was a wake-up call for 
India’s health infrastructure. I want to ask the House: Are we prepared, God forbid, if 
there were to be another pa ndemic, another raging pandemic and the answer to that 
is ‘No’. Ģाइवेट अÎपतालȗ क े हालात ये हȅ िक अगर आज आपको Ģाइवेट अÎपताल मȂ इलाज 
कराना पड़े, तो आपको लोन लेना पड़
ता है। भारत मȂ अपने घर क े गहने और अपना िरयलÎटेट 
एसेट बेचकर, पता नहीं, िकतने हजारȗ-लाखȗ लोग हर साल गरीबी रेखा क े नीचे चले जाते हȅ, 
क्यȗिक उन्हȂ एक हेÊथ इमरजȂसी क े चलते Ģाइवेट अÎपताल मȂ इलाज क
राना पड़ता है। इसिलए, 
जैसे इस देश मȂ One Nation, One Election लागू िकया जा रहा है, One Nation, One Tax की 
ओर हम बढ़ रहे हȅ, वैसे ही हमȂ One Nation, One Medical Treatment की ओर बढ़ना चा िहए। 
देश मȂ सबको नंबर वन मेिडकल टर्ीटमȂट िमले, ऐसी ËयवÎथा बननी चािहए।  
सर, मȅ  आपके  माध्यम से मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी को अपने 4 सुझाव देना चाहूंगा। पहला सुझाव है - 
Put all land and property records
 of India on blockchain. एक blockchain-based land 
legder or registry बनाइए। उसे पहले 10 मेजर शहरȗ से, महानगरȗ से और Tier-II cities से शुरू 
किरए। हर िरकॉडर्, हर sale, हर mutation, हर inheritance को एक digital record book मȂ  
डाला जाएगा, जो एक blockchain legder होगा , जो time stamped होगा, temper-proof 
होगा, 100 per cent transparent होगा और आप उससे real time property tracking कर 
सकȂ गे, िजसके  चलते instant title verification होगा। आज हमारा जो िरयलÎटेट क े land and 
property record का जो बाजार है, उसमȂ utter 
chaos है। वह chaos इसिलए है िक लोगȗ को 
रिजÎटर्ार क े दÄतर क े बाहर धक्के  लग रहे हȅ। दलालȗ ने उन अफसरȗ पर पूरे तरीके  से कÅजा 
िकया हुआ है, Ģॉपटीर् टैक्स मȂ चोर ी  होती है, circle rate को exploit करके  क ै श मȂ Ģॉपटीर्ज़ 
खरीदी जाती हȅ। आज फजीर् कागज, कÅजे, title dispute, न जाने क्या-क्या चल रहा है, िजसके  
चलते आज 66 per cent of India’s civil disput es are land disputes. 45 per cent 
properties lack clear title in India. India ra nks 133 out of 190 in Property Registration 
Efficiency Index. 48 per cent of our proper ties are under dispute and the average time 
taken by civil courts to resolve these disp utes is seven years and 6.2 crore property 
documents are pending digitization. वे तहसीलदार क े दÄतर मȂ पड़े हȅ या रिजÎटर्ार क े 
दÄतर मȂ पड़े हȅ, लेिकन उनका िडिजटाइजेशन अभी तक नहीं हुआ है। इन सारी बीमािरयȗ की 
एक ही दवा है। That is National Blockchain Registry, िजसके  चलते property disputes 
समाÃत हȗगे, िमिडल क्लास की wealth unlock होगी, क्यȗिक वे और Åयाज पर पैसा ले पाएंगे, 
Ģॉपटीर् टैक्स की compliance बढ़ेगी और REITs जैसे investment vehicles को Blockchain 
verifi
ed titles िमलȂगे और उसमȂ भी बढ़ोतरी देखी जाएगी।  
सर, इसी क े साथ-साथ, दुिनया क े कई देशȗ ने इसे लागू कर िदया है। Îवीडन मȂ यह लागू 
है, जहां पर एक िदन मȂ आप Ģॉपटीर् का टर्ांजेक्शन क ंÃलीट कर सकते हȅ। वहां िडÎÃयूट रेट 2 
88
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

परसȂट है। यह जॉिर्जया मȂ है, जहां 3 िदन मȂ Ģॉपटीर् का टर्ांजेक्शन खत्म हो जाता है और िडÎÃयूट 
रेट 1% है।  यूएई मȂ है, जहाँ 10 िमनट मȂ आप अपनी Ģॉपटीर् खरीद-बेच सकते हȅ, वहाँ dispute 
rate एक परसȂट से भी नीचे है और िंहदुÎतान मȂ Ģॉपटीर् बेचनी हो, तो दो से छह महीने लगते हȅ 
और 48 परसȂट dispute rate है। 
सर, मेरा दूसरा सुझाव inflation-linked salary revision act क े संबंध मȂ है। भारत मȂ 
वेजेज़ को महंगाई क े इंडेक्स से किरए। िवǄीय वषर् 2018 से लेकर िवǄीय वषर् 2026 मȂ हमने देखा 
िक real wages for the salaried class मȂ  16 परसȂट की िगरावट आई। इस िगरावट का मतलब, 
इन सालȗ मȂ िजस Îतर पर महँगाई बढ़ी, उस Îतर पर वेजेज़ नहीं बढ़ीं, िजसके  चलते 16 परसȂट 
की िगरावट real wages मȂ देखी गईं। इसीिलए mandatory wage indexation formula is the 
need of the hour and the Government must look at it. इसके  चलते तमाम formal sectors 
मȂ cooperative shops, factories, gig workers सबको inflation index wage hike िमलेगा 
और सरकार क े मुलािजम को तो िमलता ही है, हर साल dearness allowance िमलता है, उसके  
बाद हर क ु छ सालȗ मȂ पे कमीशन लागू होता है।  इससे आप 20 करोड़ आबादी, which is 45 per 
cent of India’s total workforce, आप उसे एडर्ेस कर पाएँगे।  
सर, इसी क े साथ-साथ मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक दुिनया क े कई देशȗ मȂ यह पहले से ही 
लागू है। यूएसए क े अंदर COLA (Cost of Living Adjustment) िसÎटम लागू है, िजसके  अंदर 
annual और automatic revision होता है। जमर्नी क े अंदर हर 18 महीन े से 24 महीन े क े अंदर 
महँगाई क े अनुसार सैलरी बढ़ा दी जाती है। जापान क े अंदर Shinto method यूज़ होता है, 
िजसमȂ annual inflation index wage hike दी जाती है और बेिÊजयम मȂ automatic indexation 
law है, िजसमȂ quarterly basis पर employees की सैलरी बढ़ाई जाती है। Sir, India is one of 
the only countries in major economies wher e 85 per cent of our formal workforce has 
zero statutory inflation protection. We are at the mercy of the em ployer’s discretion 
and our own negotiation power to raise our salaries. इसके  साथ-साथ मुझे लगता है िक 
एक minimum increase based on inflation होना चािहए।   
मेरा थडर् सुझाव माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को रहेगा िक State capital expenditure की 
matching grant, matching funding सȂटर दे, यानी हर एक रुपया, जो राज्य की सरकार 
क ै पेक्स पर, क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर पर, asset creation पर  खचर् करती है, उसकी मैिंचग गर्ांट 
एक रुपया क Ȃ दर् ǎारा राज्यȗ को िदया जाना चािहए not as loan but as a grant. आज Îटेट 
क ै पेक्स मȂ दो bottlenecks हȅ, पहला bottleneck है borrowing cap, यानी कोई भी राज्य अपने 
Îटेट जीडीपी से 3 परसȂट से ज्यादा Åयाज पर पैसा नहीं ले सकता, वह क ै पेक्स पर नहीं खचर् 
करता, वह तमाम तरीके  क े ऑपरेशनल खचर् करता है और सेक ं ड ĢॉÅलम है िक अगर क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार राज्यȗ को क ै पेक्स क े िलए पैसा देती भी है, तो वह लोन की सूरत मȂ देती है और 
क ंडीशनल लोन की सूरत पर देती है िक िकस asset पर िकतना खचर् होगा। इस तरह से एक 
क ंडीशनल लोन िदया जाता है। मेरा सुझाव है िक replace this loan with conditions given by 
the Centre to grant based on trust by the Centre.  सर, सȂटर को आने वाले पाँच वषș क े 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
89

िलए डेढ़ लाख करोड़ रुपए आवंिटत करना चािहए not as loan but as these Capex grants, 
तािक राज्यȗ मȂ सड़कȂ  बनȂ, इिरगेशन नेटवकर्  बने, लोकल पावर इंģाÎटर्क्चर बने, drinking 
water, sanitation हो और अबर्न इंģाÎटर्क्चर मȂ asset creation, asset formation िकया जाए 
not as loan, not on interest, not with principal and with no conditionality. अगर ऐसा 
होता है, तो सबसे पहले तो Îटेट की बैलȂस शीट मȂ this grant will not sit as debt. Îटेट की 
बैलȂस शीट सुंदर होगी, बेहतर होगी।  दूसरा, राज्य खुल कर क ै पेक्स पर खचर् कर पाएंगे। Third, 
it will be a high growth and a high job creator, एक growth multiplier और जॉब िकर्एटर क े 
तौर पर इसका इÎतेमाल होगा, क्यȗिक हर एक रुपया, जो आप क ै पेक्स पर खचर् करते हȅ, उससे 
भारत का जीडीपी दो से तीन रुपए बढ़ता है in a span of three to five years. इससे 
cooperative federalism मजबूत होगा और साथ-ही-साथ States will becomes builders and 
not borrowers in the eyes of the Centre.  
सर, मेरा चौथा सुझाव जो माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी क े िलए है, वह यह है िक legalize 
Virtual Digital Assets as an asset class. सर, इंिडया मȂ अभी वैसे ही Virtual Digital Assets 
de facto legalize taxation है, यानी crypto currency, stablecoin, etc., क्यȗिक अगर उनकी 
खरीद-बेच पर कोई मुनाफा होता है, तो 30 परसȂट Äलैट इनकम टैक्स लगता है और एक परसȂट 
टर्ांजेक्शन टैक्स, जो अप
नी  वÎतु बेच रहा है, उसे सरकार को जमा कराना पड़ता है। But they 
are somehow not recognized as an asset class. जो virtual digital assets हȅ, उनको 
asset class का दजार् नहीं िदया गया, िजसके  चलते कोई dedicated licensing law नहीं है, 
कोई clear consumer or investor protection कानून नहीं है, AML कानून, यानी Anti Money 
Laundering
 guidelines or directions इस asset क्लास  क े िलए नहीं है। And there is, of 
course, no explicit legal classification. As a result, what has happened is that 4.8 lakh 
crore trades in the Virtual Digital Assets has moved offshore. भारत क े बाहर िनकल कर 
अन्य देशȗ मȂ दुबई, िंसगापुर, मलेिशया और अन्य देशȗ मȂ इसका टर्ेड हो रहा है, जो भारतीय कर 
रहे हȅ। The second thing that has happened is that 73 per cent of India’s crypto trading 
volume in the financial year 2025 has moved to offshore exchanges.What has further 
happened is that 180 Virtual Digital Assets  StartUps have moved to countries like 
Dubai and Singapore and, as a result, भारत देश क े 12 करोड़ लोग ऐसे हȅ, जो इन Virtual
 
Digital Assets मȂ, Crypto मȂ, Real World Assets (RWAs) मȂ, Stablecoins मȂ इन्वेÎट करना 
चाहते हȅ, वे offshore जाकर इनवेÎट कर रहे हȅ। जरूरत है िक हम िंहदुÎतान मȂ compliance 
लागू करȂ, उसे heavily regulate करȂ, लेिकन उसे onshore लाएँ।  अग र ऐसा होता है, तो इसके  
चलते सरकार क े खजाने मȂ 15 से  20 हजार करोड़ रुपए का इजाफा होगा, उसे उतना टैक्स 
िमलेगा। इसी क े साथ-साथ, मȅ सरकार से कहना चाहता हूँ िक we currently tax these Virtual 
Digital Assets as if they are legal, but we regulate them as if they are illegal. मेरा सुझाव 
है िक इसे heavily regulate कीिजए, इस ecosystem को  ring fence कीिजए, Anti-Money 
Laundering (AML) कान ून और मजबूत कीिजए, लेिकन prohibition is not protection. 
Regulation is protection. Thank you so much, Sir.                                                        
90
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri S Niranjan Reddy. Not present. Shri Muzibulla Khan. 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान  (ओिडशा): सर, मȅ बजट पर बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। हमारे राज्य मȂ और 
क Ȃ दर् मȂ डबल इंजन की सरकार है, िजसके  बारे मȂ मȅ एक छोटी-सी शायरी बोलना चाहता हूँ: 
"क्यȗ वादा करके  वो िन भाना  भूल जाते हȅ, 
लगा क े िदल मȂ आग, वो बुझाना भूल जाते हȅ, 
रुलाते हȅ वो हमȂ और मनाना भी भूल जाते हȅ।" 
   सर, यह जो क Ȃदर्ीय बजट आया है, यह ओिडशा क े िलए बहुत िनराशाजनक है। मȅ 
खासकर, आिदवासी बहुल िजले से आता हूँ। इस बजट मȂ ओिडशा क े एगर्ीकÊचर सेक्टर क े िलए 
ज्यादा क ु छ नहीं िदया गया है। हमारे नबरंगपुर िजले मȂ धान और मक्के  का उत्पादन ज्य
ादा होता 
है।  वहाँ क े िकसान आजकल धान मंडी मȂ ठीक से बेच नहीं पाते हȅ और मक्के  क े िल ए वहाँ आज 
तक मंडी Îथािपत नहीं हुई है। वहाँ मक्का Ģोसेिंसग Ãलांट भी Îथािपत नहीं हुआ है। क Ȃ दर् सरकार 
को इस पर ध्यान देना चािहए और उसको वहाँ पर मक्का Ģोसेिंसग Ãलांट लगाने क े िलए क ु छ 
करना चा
िहए, तािक वे िकसान, जो देश को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए कोिशश कर रहे हȅ, उनको क ु छ 
लाभ हो सके ।  
 महोदय, क Ȃ दर् सरकार की तरफ से बजट मȂ अभी Îपीड रेल कॉिरडोर की घोषणा की गई, 
िजससे वाराणसी, िसलीगुड़ी, हैदराबाद, चेन्नई जैसे कई शहरȗ को कनेक्ट िकया गया है, लेिकन 
ओिडशा को कनेक्ट नहीं िकया गया। यह भी हमारे ओिडशा क े िलए बहुत दुःख की बात है। 
ओिडशा रेल िवभाग क े िलए हर साल जो रेवेन्यू जनरेट करता है, वह करीब 18 से  20 हजार  
करोड़ तक का होता है, लेिकन हमारे राज्य क े िलए जो पैसा आवंिटत िकया गय ा  है, वह उसके  
िहसाब से क ु छ नहीं है, उसका आधा पैसा भी नहीं िदया गया है। यह हमारे िलए बहुत दुःख की 
बात है। यह क्यȗ नहीं िकया गया, पता नहीं।  हमारे देश को Îवाधीन हुए 77 साल हो गए, लेिकन 
कोरापुट-जयपुर से नबरंगपुर और मलक
ानिगरी तक की रेलवे लाइन क े िलए भी बजट मȂ एक पैसे 
का भी Ģावधान नहीं िकया गया है। यह क्यȗ नहीं िकया गया, पता नहीं, लेिकन हमारे राज्य क े रेल 
मंतर्ी हȅ, इस स े बड़े दुःख की बात और क्या हो सकती है? 
सर, माइंस एंड िमनरÊस मȂ ओिडशा का योगदान बहुत है। देश मȂ 25 परसȂट iron ore और 
करीब-करीब 50 परसȂट बॉक्साइट का जो खनन होता है, वह ओिडशा देश क े िलए देता है। सबसे 
बड़ी बात यह है िक सबसे अच्छा जो कोयला है, वह भी हमारे ओिडशा मȂ उत्पािदत होता है, 
लेिकन िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ िकतनी ही बार हम लोग बोल चुक े हȅ िक उसकी रॉयÊटी को िरËयू िकया 
जाए, उसकी जो रॉयÊटी िमलती है, वह बढ़ायी जाए, लेिकन उसको 10 साल से बढ़ाया नहीं गया 
है और इस बजट मȂ भी क ु छ Ģावधान नहीं िकया गया है।   
सर, अभी जो National Waterways का Ģपोजल आया है, यह तत्का
लीन मुख्य मंतर्ी 
नवीन बाबू की सरकार क े वƪ वषर् 2008 मȂ शुरू हुआ था। अगर यह तब होता, तो यह 588 
िकलोमीटर दूरी का होता और यह महा
नदी, बैतरणी, ĤाǨणी, मैतर्ी िरवसर्, ईÎट कोÎट क ैनाल 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
91

आिद मȂ होता। अभी इसकी जो घोषणा की गई है, अगर यह काम हो गया, तो यह बहुत अच्छी बात 
होगी, हम Îवागत करȂगे, लेिकन मुझे इसमȂ भी उÇमीद बहुत कम है।  
सर, अभी 6 राज्यȗ क े िलए बुिǉÎट सिर्कट को डेवलप करने की घोषणा की गई है, लेिकन 
ओिडशा को छोड़ िदया गया है। ओिडशा मȂ करीब 200 से अिधक बौǉ Îथा
न हȅ, उनमȂ Ģमुख 
लिलतिगरी, रत्नािगरी, उदयिगरी हȅ, िजसको diamond triangular कहा जाता है।  
 महोदय, सĦाट अशोक ने उसी ओिडशा मȂ आकर िंहसा त्याग करके  बौǉ धमर् गर्हण  
िकया था। ओिडशा की इतनी importance है, लेिकन ओिडशा को उसमȂ भी शािमल नहीं िकया  
गया ...(समय की घं
टी)... उससे बड़े दुख की बात क ु छ नहीं है। अत: क Ȃ दर् सरकार से मेरी अपील है 
िक ओिडशा पर िवशेष रूप से ध्यान िदया जाए और ओिडशा क े िलए हर क्षेतर् मȂ बजट मȂ Ģावधान 
िकया जा
ए। बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद!      
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, I thank you for giving me this 
opportunity. I have to say that the succe ssive Budgets of the NDA Government are 
marching towards inequality in our societ y. Now, I will divide my speech between 
Bharat and India.  I will put about 8-10 per cent of popula tion of our country as India. 
इसमȂ हमने देखा िक capital expenditure मȂ, you are going to put a Budget of more than 
Rs. 12 lakh crore. I do not understand who w ill benefit with this. It  will not create any 
employment. Only machines will be used to make it and also only a few selected 
groups will get this contract.  
Now, I come to revision of corporat e tax in 2019, which was brought down 
from 24 to 21. In this, we lost about Rs. 2 lakh crore a year. This incentive was given 
to the private sector for investment. No investment was made except that they tried to 
clear their bank loans and othe r things. Also, one thing is ve ry sad that I will come to 
Delhi, take a Rs. 50,000 crore loan and, af ter a few years, the Government will be 
very pleased to write it off. In the last few years, I think the Government has written off 
Rs. 12 lakh crore to Rs. 15 lakh crore.  I do not k now in which direction this 
Government is going.  
Now, I come to Bharat, which consists of 92 crore people. ये जो हम लोग 
‘िवकिसत भारत’ क े जुमले सुन रहे हȅ। What efforts has the Government made to create 
some economic activity so that some purchasing power goes to this number of 
people? The Government proudly says that it is giving 5 kilograms of anaaj to 
everybody. I think this is the most insultin g thing for every Indian who is receiving it. 
Further, I feel that corporate tax has to be revised. That money has to go to rural 
sector. We should take Panchayats into confidence. Over-centralisation by this 
Government is not required. In fact, even the capital expenditure should be drastically 
92
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

reduced. A major part of that should go for strengthening villages, rural roads, rural 
healthcare, rural education and even MN REGA. In the new MNREGA, you promised 
125 days of the job, but the most peculiar thing you are saying is that 40 per cent 
contribution should come from the State; and also, you have put a provision that you 
will spend the money where you like. This is  something which should not be expected 
from the Government.  
Now, let us talk about agriculture and rural distress. Unfortunately, the hon. 
Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers is not here. We are doing everything to spoil the 
health of soil in this country for the next ge neration or maybe in the next 5-10 years. 
We are using about 40 to 42 million tonnes of  urea which is absolutely not required for 
the soil. We are only making the soil pois onous. Today, the Government should have 
slowly increased the price of urea, at least, 10  per cent every year, to bring it at parity 
with other fertilizers. Today,  a urea bag of 50 kilograms is for Rs. 260 or Rs. 265 or 
something like that and the next grade of fertili zer starts from Rs. 1350 to about       
Rs. 1800. So, if the farmer has less money, he puts extra bag of urea. Actually, only 
20 per cent to 30 per cent of the urea goes in the soil. Either it contaminates the water 
inside the soil or it goes in the air. We sp end a lot of money on the subsidy. If we 
reduce the urea intake, which should be actually 50 per cent or 60 percent, that 
amount of money saved in subsidy could be given as incentives to the farmers for 
crop diversification. Let the Government not be very proud by saying that we are 
producing 150 million tonnes of ri ce. It is at whose cost? It is at the cost of the water 
in Punjab, Haryana, and west ern UP, which would someday bring all these land to 
desert. So, the policy for rural developmen t should be farmer-s pecific. Plus the 
fertilizer used should be region-specific and all the stress should be on how to create 
demand in the rural sector. Today, we are very happy that we have made FTA from 
this country or that country. If there was a demand for 140 crore people, do we need 
to go and try to persuade these countries fo r an FTA? No! But the point is that there 
is no purchasing power because you have not created any economic activity for the 
rural poor. In the last 12 years, no efforts have been made in this direction. So, I am 
sorry to say that we are heading towards a very unequal society. …(Time-bell rings.)… 
One minute, Sir. We should also learn from  Iran and Sri Lanka that marching towards 
a religious state… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I express the views on the Budget on 
behalf of our A.I.A.D.M.K. Party and our leader Edappadi K. Palaniswami on the 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
93

Budget 2026-27 presented by the hon. Finan ce Minister. At the outset, I congratulate 
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman on becoming  India's longest continuously serving 
Finance Minister and presenting her ni nth consecutive Budget. Her commitment, 
clarity and dedication to the nation deserves appreciation.   
 Sir, I would like to recall the words of Mahakavi Bharathi:   
&“To rule titles and to enact laws, 
We women have come to lead in this world; 
Women are not inferior to men 
In attaining any kind of knowledge, skills and intellect; 
On seeing this progress, clap loudly dear women” 
These powerful lines celebrate women's leadership and wisdom. Today, India proudly 
witnesses that spirit in action.   
The Budget also gives strong emphasis to health and medical education. I take 
this opportunity to recall that when A.I.A.D.M.K. Party was in power under the 
leadership of hon. Amma Jayalalithaa ji, and afterwards Shri Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami, Tamil Nadu witnessed remarkable welfare initiatives like establishing 23 
medical colleges in four years, 7.5 per cent reservation for Government school 
students in MBBS, Amma Canteens, Amma  Pharmacies, free laptops, bicycles, 
Pongal gifts, and many other people centric schemes. 
Our leader, A.I.A.D.M.K. General-Secr etary, Edappadi K. Palaniswami has 
welcomed this Budget, stating that it st rengthens the fiscal management, reduces 
deficit and ensures sustained economic growth . The projected growth rate of 6.5 per 
cent to 7 per cent in 2025, rising further thereafter, is encour aging despite global 
uncertainties. The textile hubs of Tiruppur, Erode and Karur will particularly benefit 
from the MSME protection measures.  
Sir, Tamil Nadu is going to face the 202 6 elections. All the political parties are 
giving promises as to what they are going to present them with. In the same way, the 
Central Government promises so many proj ects and those projects are implemented. 
Elections are coming in Tamil Nadu.                                                                    
Our Party Leader, Shri Edappadi Palanisw ami assured, as hon. Prime Minister 
already announced many programmes, after wi nning the coming elections, that he is 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil 
94
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

going to give Rs. 2000 to every woman head of the family as old-age pension. The 
old-age pension will be increased from Rs. 1000 to Rs. 2000 per month for the old-
age people. And, also, Sir, the students are taking loans from the bank for studying 
higher education. But, they may not be in a position to pay it.  Therefore, now, our 
Party Leader Shri Edappadi Palaniswami, promised our Government will bear these 
kinds of loans.  …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please confine yourself to the Budget of the Central 
Government.  …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in villages all 
will get houses.  …(Interruptions)… That is the scheme. …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : It is not a State election.  …(Interruptions)…  Confine 
yourself to the Budget.  …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Yes, Sir, I am speaking on the Budget. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the Budget. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : The DMK Government gave so many promises. But, they 
failed to implement the promises. …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You discuss that in the State.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : But, they are telling that we are copying their  
manifesto… …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the Central Budget. …(Interruptions)…  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, we are not copying.  …(Interruptions)…  Since they failed 
to implement promises, we are going to implement them.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That you discuss in the State. …(Interruptions)…   
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: That is the promise we are going to  
make. …(Interruptions)…   Sir, our DMK Member recently said that the federal spirit 
has gone. He has also said that the debt tr ap is becoming deeper  and also the State 
Government is not going to get any benefit. * Tamil Nadu debt has grown sharply in 
recent years.  Look at revenue deficit.  The State is spending more than it earns in 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
95

revenue.* They promised in the election that they would not put any taxes.  But, they 
have put a good lot of taxes. …(Interruptions)… 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, he is making allegations. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I have already requested him to speak on the Central 
Budget. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, this is a federal system. . …(Interruptions)… I have to tell 
about the Property Tax. . …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You speak about the Central Budget. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Though a lot of money is collected, they are not fulfilling the 
promises. …(Interruptions)… Sir, they are disrespecting. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : *there is always cost overrun of Government  
projects. …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. I have already… …(Interruptions)… No. Not these 
words, please. …(Interruptions)…  It will not go on the record. …(Interruptions)… You 
know the rules. …(Interruptions)…   
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, I am telling. …(Interruptions)…   I am taking back those 
words. …(Interruptions)…  There is always cost overrun of Government projects.  The 
public sector is constantly losing, and revenue mobilization is not given  
attention to. …(Interruptions)… Only about 37 per cent of borrowings were used for 
capital investment. …(Interruptions)… Revenue deficit and fiscal deficit are up more 
than 30 per cent! Interest payments alone are accounted for around 20 per cent of 
revenue expenditure! …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, you speak on the Central Budget. …(Interruptions)…  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, I am
 coming to it. …(Interruptions)… The CAG repeatedly 
warns the actions of the Tamil Nadu Go vernment with regard to fiscal  
stress. *…(Interruptions)…  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
96
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak on the Central Budget. …(Interruptions)… 
Please discuss about the Central Budget. …(Interruptions)…   
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, they accused that the Central Government borrowed a lot 
of money. …(Interruptions)…I am replying to that. They accused the Central 
Government has also borrowed a lot of mone y. Same thing I am telling that this is 
also applicable to Tamil Nadu. …(Interruptions)… Whatever the Central Government 
borrowed, they spent for the welf are of the people of India. …(Interruptions)…  *They 
are burdening the people and we have to face it.  …(Interruptions)…     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  …(Interruptions)… We will see. …(Interruptions)… 
We will see it later. …(Interruptions)… I am requesting you to speak on  
the Budget. …(Interruptions)…    
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, they are diverting. Please, listen to me. …(Interruptions)… 
They are telling about double engine.  …(Interruptions)…   Sir, India is a double engine 
economy. One is Central Government, another one is State 
Governments.  …(Interruptions)… Without two engines, how can the country 
develop? …(Interruptions)… When our hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Modiji, is 
saying that we want double engine, they are accusing. …(Interruptions)… Double 
engine means NDA at both places. They are thinking it is a  single  
engine! …(Interruptions)…  Single engine is ineffective engine. …(Interruptions)… It is 
not performing. …(Interruptions)… That is why, Central Government engine is 
required. …(Interruptions)…     
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, he is accusing…. …(Interruptions)…      
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, we are telling …(Interruptions)… Shri Edappadi 
Palaniswami is accepting…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak. …(Interruptions)… I have already pointed 
out that only his speech will go on record. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, Shri Edappadi Palaniswami is accepting that we need a 
double engine. Shri Edappadi is taking  the engine, the first engine. The State 
Government is leading the …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the Union Budget now. …(Interruptions)…  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
97

DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: The second engine is the Central Government. It is going to 
support us. …(Interruptions)…Therefore, all the State Go vernments require double 
engine; that is the thing. …(Interruptions)… A single engine cannot  
run. …(Interruptions)… Therefore, they are accusing the Central Government about 
‘double engine’. They are  …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the Central Budget  
now. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: In the federal structure, we are the House of  Elders, we are 
the House of States. …(Interruptions)… When we are defending them, the Central 
Government also has to be defended.  Without double engines, Indian economy 
cannot develop. Tamil Nadu has miserably failed because the single engine is an 
ineffective engine. That is what I want to say. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please. I have already pointed out. Please speak on 
the Central Budget. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, I am coming to that. …(Interruptions)… Sir, I appreciate 
Nirmalaji. She said in her observation that they have given a lot of fund to the State 
Government. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please go back to your seat. …(Interruptions)… Madam, I 
have already pointed out. …(Interruptions)… I have already told him.  
Please. …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : The Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu is going on accusing the 
Central Government that the Ce ntre is not giving funds. …(Interruptions)… Sir, when 
Shri Modi visited Tamil Nadu, he gave a long  picture as to how many lakhs of rupees 
were given to Tamil Nadu. …(Interruptions)… How can they say that it is not  
given? …(Interruptions)…  Now also, Mr. Wilson said in his speech that Tamil Nadu 
could not get the money. …(Interruptions)…  That is what they said. These are the 
points I want to make. The hon. Railway Mi nister is also here. My request to the 
Railway Minister is for early sanction of  the new railway line from Puducherry to 
Bengaluru. Two ministers are here. That route will start from Puducherry, Viluppuram, 
Tiruvannamalai, Krishnagiri, Hosur and Bengal uru. Three States are going to benefit, 
that is, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu and Karnatak a.  Therefore, I am demanding that it 
should be fulfilled. In the same  way, with regard to roads-- I also represented Karur 
five times,--I request to expedite the implementation of the Chennai-Salem eight-
98
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

lane project, Karur-Coimbatore eight-lane project, and Karur-Trichy six-lane project. 
I request the Central Government to give its attention to this. Sir, our Civil Aviation 
Minister is here. I have a request to hi m. The Members of DMK Party and the Chief 
Minister say that he is going to start a new green airport in Hosur. …(Interruptions)… 
No, I am telling only the point. …(Interruptions)… Sir, one Minister from Tamil Nadu 
says that they do not want that project .  …(Interruptions)… That is what I  
saying. …(Interruptions)…  That is a double engine. One engine says that they want 
the project, whereas, the other engine of th e same Cabinet, the Minister of Tamil 
Nadu Government says that they  do not want that project. …(Interruptions)… What is 
the confusion? We cannot understand. …(Interruptions)… That is the double engine. 
One engine says that it wants the proj ect here. The DMK people now were only 
demanding the project. I want to me ntion the name of the Minister. * 
…(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: No, I am telling you. …(Interruptions)… He says that you do 
not want the project. The Civil Aviation Minist er is here.  What is that double engine? 
Sir, I have a request to the hon. Minister. Already a private airport is there. I request 
you to upgrade that airfield, take it over  and fulfil the ambition of Hosur and Tamil 
Nadu people by using the existing private airport. That is what I want to say. It will not 
affect the farmers. These are the things I want to say. …(Time-bell rings.)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you… …(Interruptions)… 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, I am concluding. To conclude, the Union Budget 2026-27 
strikes a fine balance between ambition and responsibility. It promotes growth without 
neglecting inclusion, encourages reform wi thout compromising stability and prepares 
India for a globally competitive future. Narendra Modi ji has an ambition and that 
ambition is ‘2047’. That is the ambition. The Budget reflects the confidence in India's 
people and clarity in India's purpose. On behalf of AIADMK Party and the people of 
Tamil Nadu, I extend my support to this  visionary document. And also in 2026, 
A I A D M K  i s  g o i n g  t o  c o m e  t o  p o w e r .  … (Interruptions)… Shri Edappadi Palaniswamy 
will become Chief Minister. He is going to implement whatever the Central 
Government is giving the fund for. …(Time-bell rings.)… *  Thank you. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Now, Shrimati Sudha Murty. 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
99

SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY (Nominated): Th ank you, Sir, for giving me an 
opportunity to speak today. I would like to congratulate Madam Nirmala ji, for 
presenting consecutive ninth Budget. As an  Indian, I am very happy. As a woman, I 
am very proud about that.  Sir, I want to ta ke the first few things in the Budget.  She 
has given a lot of money for the culture division, archaeology and culture and 
development in that. I want to take the ‘Project Mausam’ forward. I request our 
Archaeology Department, through this Budget, to have a conference of 39 countries 
in the particular place Puri or Konark, wher e once upon a time people used to travel. 
We can call all 39 countries’ Ambassadors or High Commissioners. We can call all 
archaeology people from respective countries, hold a conference which will showcase 
India's culture and come out with a proper document, what is India's cultural effect 
on their countries and what we have lear ned from those countries. This document 
should be used for research to be introduced in colleges, so that people would know 
what the trade routes were on ce upon a time and what we learned from that. This is 
one.   
The second thing is this. I am very happy about the ‘She Market’ because 
women require a market but with certain co nditions. This should be number one and 
self-sustainable. Number two: It should be in an area wh ich is well lit. There should 
be enough space for lactating mothers and pregnant women. Number three: It should 
be in the easily approachable area, so that you will get a lot more people to buy and it 
should be convenient for women to come and do their business.   
Sir, the hon. Minister has increased the Budget for infrastructure by rupees 
one lakh crore. I am extremely happy. Hostels, what she has asked to build per 
district, are really important because I know what it is for a woman without a toilet. It 
makes a great difference for women if they have their own hostels. Most importantly, 
Sir, I want to tell a story today; how Indi a has changed with a good Budget, with a 
confident Budget, with a great leader. And this is a true incident. It is not a story as 
such.  In 1979, Sir, first time I traveled to  America. It was my fi rst travel by air and 
going to a different country. I got down in  Boston and there was a Visa and Custom 
officer. I was last in the queue. They we re winding up and I stood in a queue and 
when my turn came, they were tired prob ably. He asked me following questions. 
Number one, ‘Why have you come to this country?’ When are you returning? What's 
your husband's salary? How long do you wa n t  t o  s t a y  i n  t h i s  c o u n t r y ?  H o w  m u c h  
dollars do you have? Do you have the return ticket? It was difficult questions for a 
young girl of 28 years old, first time co ming out of country. I answered all the 
questions.  He checked my re turn ticket.  Then, I said, ‘I  want 6 months Visa.’ And, 
100
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

he said, ‘No, you will get only 3 months Visa.’  He stamped it and he did not give any 
explanation. I did not have the courage to ask, ‘Why only 3 months.’ I went to the 
Custom Officer. He looked from top to bottom and told me, ‘Lady, what are you 
wearing this kind of huge material? I said, ‘It's called saree, Sir.’ He said, ‘is it?’ Then 
he said, ‘You are from which country? I to ld him, ‘I am from a country known as 
India.’ He said, ‘Oh! I know a little bit about that. Do you have snakes on the road?’ I 
said, ‘No, only in the field.’ He asked, ‘Is your father Maharaja?’ I said, ‘No, he is a 
doctor.’ He asked me, ‘How can you speak good English?’ I said, ‘We have many 
languages in India, but English is also taug ht to us.’ Then he asked me, ‘Why have 
you come over here?  It is a developed coun try.’ I said, ‘My husband is working, so I 
have come here.’ Then he said, ‘Is ever ybody a magician there?’ I said, ‘No sir. 
There are a very few magicians. We go and s ee their play. It is like anyone else.’ He 
looked as if I am from a different planet and looked down upon me heavily and told me 
to go and check my bag thoroughly. There wa s nothing to bring, because I was also 
not well off to take something. 
4.00 P.M. 
I came out holding my passport. I felt very  sad. India is a country which has 5,000 
years old history, a great civilization, a gr eat culture and it has given ‘Zero’ to the 
world. All these things we have. And the way he treated me was, --as if I was coming 
from somewhere with no culture, no money,  -- very different. I met my husband Mr. 
Murty. It is not that I am telling my personal  story, it is a story which gives me even 
today encouragement in life. I told him ho w these people are treating us. He said, 
“People who know history can appreciate history; a common man or aam aadmi will 
appreciate your performance.” If you perform well, the world appreciates. If you don't 
perform, people will neglect even though you have a great history. He said, “we are 
young.”  At that time, both of us were young. What we can do in our lifetime is, let us 
give something back to our country, work si ncerely and perform well. That is all we 
have in our hands. We are simple people, ordinary people, from ordinary families; we 
will not be able to do more than that. But,  let us give our 100 per cent, whatever is 
possible, to improve our country.  Many ye ars passed, Sir. So much water has flown 
over a period of time. Recently, I went to  America after many, many years. I was the 
last in the queue. Actually, I came from Cuba, I suppose. Somewhere from the South 
America I was coming. In my plane, I was the only lady wearing a sari. I came to the 
Visa office. I thought, again, what questions he will ask. Again, he was winding up. I 
was the last person in the queue. He looked at me and said, “Why have you come 
here?” I said, “I have to deliver a few lectures in America.” He said, “what are you?” I 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
101

said, “I am an author and a philanthropher.”  He said, “Oh! that's fair. That is nice. ” 
Then, he stamped. He did not ask me any question. He stamped. When he stamped, 
he said, “three months.” I said, “No, Sir, I do not want th ree months. I will be here 
only for a week. Why are you stamping for three months? ” He jokingly said, “Oh! no 
problem. Ours is a great country. Welc ome to America. See many more places. ” I 
was a little bit surprised. When he was winding up, incidentally, he asked me, 
“Madam, you are from which place. ”  I said, “From India.” I said, “I am from South of 
India, by the name Karnataka, that is, Bangalore. He said, “Oh! you don't have to 
give explanation. Bangalore is a very famous city. It is a Silicon Valley of India. I know 
a lot of people from your country who are very good in software. They come from 
India and work here. So, we are aware of  Bangalore and also joked, a day may 
come, we can use Bangalore as a verb, ‘Bangaloored’, and he left. ” Then I went to 
customs office. I thought he will ask me, “What have you brought?”  Because I came 
from South America, he might search. He looked at me and said, “Oh! lady, we don't 
have to search you for anything and you can go. ” He was winding up. He came and 
we walked together. He said, “ Can I ask you some more questions? ” I said, please 
do ask. He said, “I have observed India has change d. India has become different. ” 
He told me that you Indians are very enterprising.  A lot of unicorns have developed in 
India, and they do come for business here. I said, ‘yes.’ Then, he said, “You Indians 
are very hardworking. I have never seen someone hardworking like this.  Because, on 
Sundays, you go to shop. All the shops are closed on Sunday in America, but an 
Indian grocery shop is always op ened. You are hardworking people. ” Number three, 
you people help each other. You help each other a lot.  Number four, he said on a 
lighter side, your food is excellent because , you go to any place in  America, you have 
an Indian restaurant and a Patel's Motel. Then, he said, more than that, you are law-
abiding people. You are good people. So, by th is time, we know, what is India. And, 
then, he told me, I know India's diaspora. I attend Diwali, Holi and Gujarati’s Navratri. 
Then, he says in his own accent, “Your people are so large hearted, t hey call 
everyone. India is something different which we never knew. And, many of my friends 
do come to India, particularly, for dental  surgery because dental surgery in America 
takes time, it is expensive, in India, it is much cheaper. ” I came out holding my 
passport. "घर वही, आंगन वही, जाने सब क ु छ नया-नया।" What is that which made India 
great in the last 10-15 years? What is that which made India great? The same person, 
the same person …(Interruptions)… and it is my experience. Without any bias, I am 
telling you. What is that which made India great? Sir, it is the stable Government, 
stable finance Budget, bold Budget and a great leader, a leader who is proud of 
102
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Indian origin, a leader who respects India' s culture, a leader who is not scared, a 
leader who believes that Indians can make it.  …(Interruptions)…  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, please. …(Interruptions)… No comments, please.  
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY: Sir, my experi ence has taught me. It is my own 
experience. Without bias, I am telling you. It  has taught us that with a good leader, a 
good finance Budget and with law-abiding people, we can make anything. There are 
hiccups; there are difficulties; there are pi tfalls. Rome was not built in a day. So 
nothing will happen in one day.  Nothing will happen in one year. It takes time. But for 
the benefit of the country, we should alwa ys have faith in good value system, and, 
with our good Budget, we can do it. This is my unbiased opinion. I am a nominated 
Member. For me, truth and truth alone stan ds. Thank you very much, Sir. Jai Hind! 
V a n d e  M a t a r a m !            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you. Now, Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy ; not present. 
Shri A.A. Rahim.  
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala) : Sir, firstly, I would like to speak for the Indian youth. 
Subsequently, I would like to speak for my own State, Kerala.  
Sir, the Indian youth are haunted by three nightmares: EM I, CIBIL Score and 
Targets. Three nightmares haunt them. Sir, before explaining these three nightmares, 
I would like to highlight the alarming and th e escalating tendency of living expenditure 
of our country.  
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) in the Chair.] 
Sir, I would also like to flag the alarming unemployment rate in India. According 
to Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy data, the unemployment rate is at 6.85 per 
cent in January, 2026. This is very shameful and very alarming.  
Sir, before I come to the crux of thes e three nightmares, we  must discuss the 
so-called job market in our country. As  we know, the Congress-led Government 
introduced neoliberal economic policie s in 1991. Subsequently, the BJP-led 
Government has aggressively continued the same policies. 
 Sir, the three nightmares I mentione d here, all three nightmares, are the 
aftermath of these anti-youth, anti-people neoliberal policies.  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
103

Sir, let us look at the trends in the so -called job market during the neoliberal 
era: Unemployment, Underemployment and Rapid Privatization of the Public Sector.  
Sir, contractualization has become the new normal, which means there is no 
job stability in our country. Sir, please look at the Ag niveer Scheme. Through the 
Agniveer Scheme, this Government has even contractualized our Army.  
Sir, as of 2023, the Union Government ha d -- I got a response  in this august 
House from the Treasury Branches -- 9. 64 lakh vacant posts across various 
Departments of the Union Government. Sir, kindly go through paragraph 12.9 of the 
Economic Survey, 2025. It stated that regula r salaried jobs declined from 22.8 per 
cent to 21.7 per cent. However, this time , the Economic Survey has remained silent 
on regular salaried employment. Sir, by reducing the regular salaried jobs, the 
Government is destroying the public sector. As a result, you ar e pushing the Indian 
youth to unorganized sector. Sir, they  are facing immense hardship in the 
unorganized sector. Look at IT sector and the banking sector. In the IT sector and the 
banking sector, including the public sect or, employees are facing excessive work 
pressure and unrealistic targets.  
Sir, a document provided by the Bank Employees Federation of India cited a 
report stating that 500 bank employees lo st their lives due to work pressure. We 
cannot forget Anna Sebastin, a victim of work  pressure and lack of work-life balance. 
Just look at the increasing size of the gig economy in the country. Can the hon. 
Finance Minister explain why people are ru shing into the gig economy? It clearly 
indicates that the organized sector is collapsing.  As a result, the youth of this country 
are being forced to chase the gig economy, the private sector and the corporate 
sector. Therefore, I urge the Government to stop contractualization and fill up existing 
vacancies with immediate effect.  Legislatio n must be brought in to ensure work-life 
balance, including right to disconnect. 
 Sir, I would now like to talk about my State, Kerala. We are forced to talk 
about discrimination against our State which has been going on. There has been a 
long-standing demand for AIIMS in my State.  Whenever my friend, Shri Suresh Gopi, 
is in Kerala, he declares th at Keralities would soon get A IIMS, so much so that now 
there is an AIIMS in every culvert, in his words, or kalungu as we call it! In every 
culvert there is AIIMS!  Whenever my friend , Shri Suresh Gopi, is there in Kerala, he 
declares that we are getting AIIMS. What  is the reality? Why are you neglecting 
Kerala? We are a State with all respect an d dignity. Why is the Union Government 
104
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

denying measures to Kerala? The Cong ress and the BJP are spreading false 
propaganda that Kerala’s debt burden is increasing. That is not the reality.  The Union 
Budget, 2026 states that the total debt burden of the Union Government would 
increase from Rs. 1,97,18,016 crore to Rs. 2,14,82,050 crore in 2026-27. But in 
Kerala, the debt-GDP ratio is only 34.87 per cent. Sir, according to debt to GDP ratio 
figures, based on the 2025-26 Budget Es timates, sourced from PRS legislative 
research and compiled by Forbes India, the debt to GDP ratio of Jammu and Kashmir 
is 51 per cent. …(Time-bell rings.)… Sir, I am about to conclude. 
For Arunachal Pradesh, it is 45.9 per cent.  For Punjab, it is 44.5 per cent.  For 
Himachal Pradesh, it is 40.5 per cent.  Fo r West Bengal, it is 38 per cent and Bihar, 
37 per cent.  Yet, the Congress and the BJP mislead the people by saying that Kerala 
has the highest debt-GDP ratio. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANES WAR KALITA): Thank you. Please 
conclude.  Your time is up.  I have to call the next speaker. 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Sir, I am about to conclude. Sir, one important point – 
immediately after the Budget, former Mini ster and BJP State Pr esident said that 
Kerala will not get anything from the Union Government if people don’t elect the BJP 
in Kerala. Sir, is this federalism? Is this the spirit of federalism? I would conclude by 
saying that Kerala has grown without the help of BJP and will continue to grow 
w i t h o u t  t h e  B J P .           
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KA LITA): The next speaker is Shri 
Sanjay Kumar Jha.              
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा (िबहार): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आज अपने दल, जनता दल 
(यूनाइटेड) की ओर से माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी ǎारा ĢÎतुत इस बजट क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए 
खड़ा हुआ हूँ। सर, मȅ पहले क ु छ नेशनल लेवल Ģायोिरटीज़ से जुड़े इिनिशएिटËस पर बात करूँगा 
और िफर िब
हार-सȂिटर्क क ु छ बातȂ, जो इस बजट मȂ हȅ, उन पर अपनी बात रखूँगा।  
सर, यह बजट बताता है िक सरकार भारत की लॉन्ग टमर् गर्ोथ पर ध्यान क Ȃिदर्त कर रही 
है। कई सालȗ तक अपनी ऊजार्, खचर् और घाटे को संभालने पर ध्यान लगाने क े बाद अब ध्यान 
क्षमता-िनमार्ण पर है। भले ही शेयर बाजार मȂ उत ार-चढ़ाव िदखे, लेिकन बजट की िदशा भारत क े 
िफसकल िडिसिÃलन और आिर्थक रणनीित पर अिडग है। इस बजट मȂ वैिÌवक पिरिÎथितयȗ को 
लेकर बड़े दावे नहीं िकए गए हȅ। इसके  बजाय, बजट उन इंÎटी Ƿ ूशनल िरफॉÇसर् पर क Ȃिदर्त है, 
जो भारत की िवकास दर को बनाए रखने क े िलए जरूरी हȅ।  आिखरकार, भारत की गर्ोथ क े िलए 
सबसे िनणार्यक मुǈे घरेलू Îतर क े ही हȅ। जैसे, इंģाÎटर्क्चर को ठीक करना, ऐसा ǩूमन क ैिपटल, 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
105

जो दुिनया से मुकाबला कर सके  और ऐसी ही संÎथाओं क े िवकास को आगे बढ़ाना। जीडीपी क े 
Ģितशत क े रूप मȂ जहाँ रेवेन्यू ÎपȂिंडग मȂ िगरावट जारी है, वहीं Åयाज भुगतान िनधार्िरत दायरे मȂ 
है। रेवेन्यू ÎपȂिंडग मȂ राज्यȗ को पूंजीगत खचर् क े िलए दी जा ने वाली सहायता क े गर्ांट्स भी शािमल 
हȅ। इन्हȂ जोड़कर देखȂ, तो Capital to Current Spending Ratio को इस बजट मȂ करीब 50% 
तक ले जाने की योजना है। क ैिपटल ÎपȂिंडग मȂ यह बढ़ोतरी बताती है िक सरकार की नजर 
short-term consumpti
on पर नहीं, बिÊक long-term investment and capacity building पर 
है। यह िनिÌचत है िक यही खचर् आने वाले वषर् मȂ भारत की गर्ोथ Îटोरी को असली रÄतार देगा।  
जीडीपी क े मुकाबले सरकारी आमदनी और खचर् दोनȗ कम होने क े अनुमान हȅ। आमदनी मȂ 
क ेवल 0.2% अंक, खचर् मȂ लगभग 0.30%
 अंक - िजससे िफसकल डेिफिसट मȂ लगभग 
0.05% अंक का सुधार आएगा। यह कदम Government borrowings घटाकर micro economy 
stability मजबूत करेगा और private investment को आकिर्षत करेगा।  
इंģाÎटर्क्चर मȂ लगातार इन्वेÎटमȂट िकया जा रहा है। इससे सरकार की राजकोषीय 
रणनीित और मजबूत हुई है। कजर् को लेकर सरकार की ÎपÍटता ने इसके  टर्Î
ट को और बढ़ाया है। 
अगर हम sectoral focus area और रोजगार की बात करȂ, तो बजट मȂ रोजगार पैदा करने क े 
िलए manufacturing sector को सहारा देने की बा त  कही गई है। खासकर, textiles और sports 
goods जैसे ज्यादा रोजगार देने वाले क्षेतर्ȗ पर जोर िदया गया है। इसके  साथ ही, rare  earth 
minerals, semi-conductors और bio-pharma जैसे रणनीितक और उभरते क्षेतर्ȗ को भी खास 
फोकस मȂ रखा गया है। इस बजट मȂ 200 legacy औǏोिगक  clusters को  दोबारा सिकर्य करने 
और champion MSMEs तैयार करने की योजनाएं भी सामने रखी गई हȅ। हम
ारे मंतर्ी, जीतन राम 
मांझी जी यहाँ बैठे हȅ। इनका बहुत बड़ा काम है और अभी इनके  सेक्टर क े बजट पर काफी फोक स 
रहा है।   
इस बजट मȂ सिर्वस सेक्टर क े िवÎतार और रोजगार पर भी ध्यान िदया गया है, िजसमȂ 
ट ूिरज्म, खासतौर पर मेिडकल ट ूिरज्म और टर्ैिंकग रूट्स क े िलए ठोस कदम उठाने की बात कही 
गई है। लेिकन, िसफर्  घरेलू रोजगार ही काफी नहीं है,  हमȂ global value chain मȂ भी अपनी जगह 
मजबूत करनी होगी। एफडी
आई को आकिर्षत करने क े िलए एक साहिसक पहल क े तहत cloud 
service providers को 2047 तक टैक्स हॉिलडे देने का ĢÎताव रखा गया है। यह भारत को 
digital infrastructure hub बनाने और वैिÌ वक टेक्नोलॉिजकल सÃलाई चेन मȂ बड़ी िहÎसेदारी 
हािसल करने क े संकÊप को दशार्ता है।  
इस बजट मȂ िडिजटल महत्वाकांक्षाओं क े साथ-साथ शहरीकरण पर भी खास जोर िदया 
गया है। यह माना गया है िक आने वाले समय मȂ भारत की बहुत सारी िवक ास की कहानी शहरȗ मȂ 
गढ़ी जाएगी। साथ ही, research, education और skill development मȂ िकए जा रहे इन्वेÎटमȂट 
का मकसद ऐसे human capital को तैयार करना है, जो ग्लोबल इकोनॉमी मȂ लंबे समय तक 
िवकास को सहारा दे सके ।  
106
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

सर, मȅ िबहार से आता हूँ। िबहार मȂ तरक्की की असली क ुँजी human capital and 
infrastructure मȂ इन्वेÎटमȂट है। िबहार क े िलए यह बजट वाकई एक अहम मोड़ सािबत होगा, 
क्यȗिक जब हम दुिनया मȂ कहीं जाते हȅ, तो लोग कहते हȅ िक हमारी aging population  है, हमारे 
यहाँ यंग लोग नहीं हȅ। अगर हम उनको िÎकल कर देते हȅ, तो िफर उनके  िलए sky is the limit है 
और वे दुिनया मȂ कहीं भी जा सकते हȅ।  
पूवȘदय माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी की एक महत्वपूणर् कÊपना रही है। पूरा पूवीर् भारत हमेशा 
ही neglected रहा।  अब पूवȘदय क्षेतर् को बजट मȂ Ģाथिमकता दी गई है। यह िनिÌचत है िक वहाँ 
िवकास की काफी गुंजाइश है और रोजगार तथा सेक्टोरल गर्ोथ की जो राÍ
टर्ीय योजनाएँ मȅने अभी 
बताईं, उनका सबसे बड़ ा फायदा िबहार को िमल रहा है। िबहार क े पास युवाओं का भंडार है - 
हुनरमंद, मेहनती युवा, जो आगे बढ़ना चाहते हȅ। इन ÎकीÇस का पूरा लाभ उठाकर हम अपनी इस 
युवा शिƪ को असली opportunities मȂ बदलȂगे। 
इस बजट मȂ ट ूिरįम को िमली Ģाथिमकता िबहार की क्षमताओं से मेल खा
ती है। साउथ 
ईÎट एिशया मȂ करोड़ȗ लोगȗ की आÎथा बौǉ धमर् से जुड़ी है। ऐसे मȂ िबहार का बौǉ सिर्कट, जो 
पूवार्ंचल से लेकर क ुशीनगर, राज गीर, बोधगया आिद तक जाता है। यह पूरा बौǉ सेक्टर 
अंतरराÍटर्ीय Ǜǉालुओं को आकिर्षत करेगा और िबहार क े िलए रोजगार क े नए अवसर create 
करेगा। िपछले बजट मȂ भी माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने राजगीर और गया को main focus मȂ  रखा 
था। घोिषत टेक्सटाइल से पहले भाग
लपुर और गया जैसे शहरȗ क े टेक्सटाइल - हमारा मधुबनी 
खादी, टेक्सटाइल मȂ िकतना जबरदÎत काम करता था - िÎकिंलग इकोिसÎटम को नई ऊजार् 
िमलेगी, िजससे Îथानीय युवाओं क े कौशल िवकास और रोजगार क े अवसर बढ़Ȃगे। वहीं पटना, 
मुज़Äफरपुर, भागलपुर, दरभंगा, बेगूसराय, नालंदा, पूिर्णया और गया जैसे पाँच लाख से अिधक 
जनसंख्या वा
ले शहरȗ क े िवकास क े िलए अितिरƪ िवकास फ ं ड िमलेगा, जो इस बजट मȂ िदया 
गया है, िज सस े शहरी इंģाÎटर्क्चर, बेहतर कनेिक्टिवटी और technology uses मȂ उÊलेखनीय 
सुधार आएगा। इससे िबहार service-led investment को attract करेगा, शहरȗ मȂ high-paying 
नौकिरयां पैदा हȗगी और एक मजबूत tech ecosystem का िवकास होगा। 
महात्मा गांधी गर्ाम Îवराज इिनिशएिटव क े तहत गाँवȗ मȂ पिरवारȗ को खादी, हȅडलूम और 
हȅडीकर्ाÄट से जुड़ी का
यर्शालाओं मȂ काम करने का अवसर िमलेगा, िजससे उनकी आमदनी बढ़ेगी 
और गर्ामीण िशÊप न क ेवल सांÎकृ ितक पहचान बनेगा, बिÊक पिरवारȗ क े िलए एक िवÌवसनीय 
आय का ǣोत भी बनेगा। 
िबहार मȂ कनेिक्टिवटी और लॉिजिÎ
टक्स क े कई बड़े Ģोजेक्ट्स पर काम चल रहा है, 
िजसका हम Îवागत करते हȅ। जो हाई-Îपीड कॉिरडोर वाराणसी से िसलीगुड़ी िदया गया है, 
उसका मेजर पाटर् िबहार क े पटना से होकर गुज़रेगा, क्यȗिक िसलीगुड़ी तो बंगाल मȂ बॉडर्र है। 
इससे िबहार की इकोनॉ
मी और इंģाÎटर्क्चर का Îवरूप बदल जाएगा। रेल मंतर्ी जी ने भी बताया 
है िक इस कॉिरडोर क े माध्यम से लगभग दस हज़ार करोड़ रुपये का investment िबहार  मȂ 
आएगा। 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
107

साथ ही, देशभर मȂ 20 नए National Waterways  बनाने की घोषणाओं से िबहार क े कई 
शहरȗ को सीधा लाभ िमलेगा। इससे एक्सपोटर् आसान और अिधक मज़बूत होगा। इसके  अंतगर्त 
पटना मȂ िशप िरपेयर की सुिवधा िवकिसत की जा रही है। वतर्मान मȂ देश मȂ िशप िरपेयर का काम 
क ेवल कोलकाता मȂ होता है और देश मȂ एक परसȂट ही िशप िरपेयर का काम होता है, तो पटना मȂ 
यह सुिवधा िवकिसत होने से वहां काफी सुिवधाएं हȗगी।  
मȅ दो िवषय पर और चचार् करना चाह ता था। एक तो हम लोग िबहार से आते हȅ, िवशेष रूप 
से नॉथर् िबहार से, जहाँ बाढ़ की समÎया लगातार बनी रहती है। िपछले बजट मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार और 
माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने कोसी नदी मȂ बाढ़ की समÎया पर िव शेष ध्यान िदया। कोसी को हमेशा 
अिभशाप क े रूप मȂ जाना जाता था, अब तो सांसद लोगȗ क े िलए जो घर बनाए गए हȅ, उनमȂ एक 
का नाम कोसी रखा गया है। कोसी को पहले अच्छे भाव से नहीं देखा जाता था। बाढ़ की समÎया 
को minimiz
e करने क े िलए western Kosi मȂ irrigation facilities क े िलए भारत सरकार क े 
िपछले बजट मȂ Ģोिवज़न िकया गया था। मुझे यह बताते हुए खुशी हो रही है िक इस पर काम शुरू 
हो चुका है। नेपाल मȂ लगभग 35 िकलोमीटर  canal की  lining करन े का कायर् शुरू हो गया है। 
पहली बार िबहार मȂ flood की समÎया को address िकया जा रहा है। मुझे िवÌवास है िक आने 
वाले समय मȂ नॉथर् िबहार से होने वाला बड़ा माइगर्ेशन काफी हद तक कम होगा। एक ĢॉÅलम तो 
नेपाल मȂ हाई डैम बनने की है। जब तक वह नहीं बनता है, तब तक इन सभी initiatives से उǄर 
िबहार मȂ बाढ़ की िÎथित मȂ काफी हद तक सुधार आए
गा और काम शुरु होने से सुधार आ रहा है। 
एक और िव
षय मȅ चुनाव मȂ देख रहा था। मȅ चुनाव की चचार् इसिलए कर रहा हूं, क्यȗिक 
अभी िबहार मȂ ही चुनाव हुए हȅ। हम लोग िमिथला क्षेतर् से आते हȅ। यहां कांगर्ेस क े एक नेता गए और 
जाकर मखाना क े तालाब मȂ क ू द गए िक खेती क ै से होती है? मखाना क े तालाब मȂ क ूदकर क ेवल 
फोटो िंखचव
ाने क े िलए िकसानȗ क े साथ खड़े हो गए और कोई मतलब नहीं था। फोटो िंखचवाई, 
अखबार मȂ डाली और आज तक जो गरीब मखाना िकसान हȅ, उनके  िलए क ु छ नहीं िकया। इसी 
एनडीए और मोदी जी की सरकार ने िबहार को पहला मखाना बोडर् िदया। आज मखाना बोडर् 
functional हो गया है। आज दरभंगा मȂ एयरपोटर् है, पूिर्णया मȂ एयरपोटर् है।  आप लो ग मखाना 
खाते हȅ, यह मुझे नहीं पता, अगर मखाना खाते हȅ, तो मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक मखाना 
िसफर्  िमिथला मȂ पैदा होता है। आज मखाना बोडर् बनने से, मखाना बोडर् functional  होने से, 
िजसको मोदी सरकार ने िकया, एनडीए सरकार ने िकया है - जो आज तक अित िपछड़ा समाज 
क े लोग, गरीब लोग, जो पानी मȂ जाकर काम करते थे, उनके  िलए िकसी ने नहीं सोचा। उन्हȗने 
क ेवल फोटो िंखचवाने क े अलावा कोई काम नहीं िकया, लेिकन आज वहां मखाना बोडर् 
functional हो गया। मखाना बोडर् क े शुरू होने से िकसान को एक मािर्कट, टेक्नोलॉजी और सारी 
सुिवधाएं िमलनी शुरू हो गई हȅ। मȅ अपनी पाटीर् की तरफ से इस बजट क े पक्ष मȂ …( Ëयवधान)… 
मखाना की जो टर्ेड डील हुई है, उस इंडो-यूएस टर्ेड डील क े अंतगर्त मखाना अमेिरका जाएगा। 
दरभंगा और पूिर्णया से मखाना अमेिरका जाएगा और वहां क े Îटोर मȂ ऑलरेडी मखाना िमलता है। 
अब यह चेन इफे क्ट होने से पहली बार मखाना क े िलए और मखाना िकसानȗ क े िलए इस सरकार 
ने इतना बड़ा काम िकया है। उसको रूट भी िमल गया, उड़ान Îकीम क े अंतगर्त एयरपोटर् भी है। 
अब कागȘ िसÎटम से देश-दुिनया मȂ मखाना जा सकता है। इसकी सारी चेन िकर्एट हो गई है। 
108
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

िपछली बार क े बजट का जो इÇपैक्ट था, वह िबहार क े गर्ाउंड पर िदखाई दे रहा है और िनिÌचत 
रूप से इस बार क े बजट मȂ जो Ģोिवजन िकया गया है, खासकर ट ूिरįम सेक्टर मȂ, मुझे लगता है 
िक बहुत कम इन्वेÎटमȂट है और सबसे ज्यादा employment है। काफी opportunitie s  create हो 
रही हȅ, उनका बहुत बड़ा फायदा िबहार को िमलेगा। िबहार मȂ जो यूथ है, अगर हम उनको टर्Ȃड 
करते हȅ, तो हरेक जगह उनको इसका फायदा िमलेगा।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अपनी पाटीर् की तरफ से इस बजट का पुरजोर समथर्न करते हुए 
अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Thank you. Now
, Shrimati 
Jaya Amitabh Bachchan. 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITAB H BACHCHAN (Uttar Pradesh) : This is really strange 
because every time I get an opportunity to speak, you are in the Chair there. अब  इसे 
सौभाग्य समझूं या अभाग्य समझूं, मȅ नहीं बता सकती। मȅ संजय जी से कहना चाहती हूं िक अभी 
जो डील हुई है, उसमȂ आप मखाना भेिजए, मगर हम लोगȗ को popcorn खाना पड़ेगा।    
Sir, I am n
ot an expert in numbers but there are some basic queries that I 
have, which, I think, are important and I n eed some clarifications. My first query is: 
what percentage of the Budget has been  allocated for job creation of 3.1 crore 
unemployed youth? I believe, a lot of promises have been made to this sector and 
this section of the population.   
 My second query is: what are the prov isions made in the Budget for 76 per 
cent educated unemployed women? My thir d query pertains to the field I am a 
Member of, that is, the Indian Entertainment industry. This industry is not only one of 
the largest contributors to the economy, but some of the highest taxpayers in the 
country also are from this industry. Addi tionally, they are the true cultural 
ambassadors, internationally, of the country.  
Despite these contributions, the entert ainment tax and GST levied on films 
remain among the highest in the world. Thro ugh you, Sir, I would like to know what 
provisions have been made in this Budget to ease the tax burden on this industry and 
support its growth. Otherwise, we will on ly be watching films and television 
programmes from the rest of the world except India because  today the industry is in 
such a bad condition that it is very, very di fficult for them to f und a project which can 
come on OTT or which can come on the theat res. My fourth query,  Sir, is this. Our 
senior citizens, who are the pillars of th e society, are surviving on a meagre two 
hundred rupees a month for those aged between 60 and 79, and five hundred rupees 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
109

for those who are over 80. This was under the Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension 
Scheme, with Budget 2026, keeping allocations  frozen, letting inflation silently erode 
their dignity and security. इस तरह से तो भारत का िवकास नहीं होने वाला है। This is the 
second time I am saying the same thing. La st year also, I said the same thing and I 
am repeating it now hoping that I will be heard. Thank you.     
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Thank you. Now,            
Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan. 
Ǜी चौधरी मोहÇमद रमज़ान (जÇमू-कÌमीर): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मुझे सदन मȂ हो  रही चचार् मȂ 
भाग लेने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या। महोदय, मȅ बजट 2026-27 पर 
बोलने जा रहा हूँ। मȅ सबसे पहले यह बताना चाहूँगा िक इस सारी क ंटर्ी मȂ िरयासत जÇमू-कÌमीर 
एक वािहद िरयासत है, जहाँ का बजट दो जगहȗ पर बनता है। एक बज
ट ऑनरेबल फाइनȂस 
िमिनÎटर सािहबा ने यहाँ पर िदया है, िजसमȂ यू.टीज़ का भी बजट था और दूसरा बजट, वह 
बजट है, जो हमारी असेÇबली बनाती है। हमारी असेÇबली ने अभी जे0 एंड क े0 क े िलए जो बजट 
बनाया है, उसकी रािश 1 लाख, 27 हज़ ार, 767 करोड़ रुपये है। इसमȂ करीबन 80 हज़ार  करोड़ 
रुपये क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर क े रूप मȂ थे। महोदय, पािर्लयामȂट की तरफ से अभी ऑनरेबल 
फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर  सािहबा ने जो बजट यहाँ पर िदया है, वह करीबन 43 हज़ार करोड़ रुपये का 
है। मȅ यहाँ पर ऑनरेबल फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािह
बा से पूछना चाहता हूँ, जो बदिकÎमती से यहाँ 
पर मौजूद नहीं हȅ, िक लाÎट ईयर भी हमारा जो यूटी का बजट था, जो सȂटर्ल गवमȄट ने िदया था, 
वह 43 हज़ार करोड़ रुपये ही रखा गय
ा था, तब क्या वजह है िक इस साल भी यह उतना ही रखा 
गया है? बाकी Îटेट्स मȂ यह एलोके शन करीबन 12,13,14, 18, 19 और 20 परस Ȃट तक बढ़ाया 
गया है, लेिकन िरयासत जÇमू-कÌमीर का इस साल का बजट, जो इस पािर्लयामȂट से बना है, 
िजसको फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा ने िदया है, उसको उतना ही रखा गया है, िजतना लाÎट ईयर 
था? हालाँिक सभी लोग जानते हȅ िक महँगाई ने आम लोगȗ की कमर तोड़ दी है, कॉÎट ऑफ 
िलिंवग िक
तना हाई हो गय ा  है, डॉलर की कीमत रुपये क े मुकाबले िकतनी बढ़ चुकी है, िफर भी 
उतना ही बजट रखा गया है। मȅ यहाँ पर ऑनरेबल फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा से यह पूछना 
चाहूँगा, बिÊक िरयासत जÇमू-कÌमीर क े लोगȗ की तरफ से िरक्वेÎट भी करना चाहूँगा िक इन्हȗने 
जÇमू-कÌमीर यूिनयन टेिरटरी क े िल
ए जो 43 हज़ार करोड़ का बजट रखा है, उसको उनकी 
जरूिरयात क े मुतािबक बढ़ा दȂ और जो Îटेप आपने दूसरी Îटेट्स क े िलए उठाया है, वही Îटेप 
उठाते हुए बजट को बढ़ाकर हमȂ भी दे दȂ।  
 महोदय, मुझे याद है िक िजस वƪ आिर्टकल 370 इसी  प
ािर्लयामȂट मȂ खत्म िकया गया 
था, जो 5 अगÎत, 2019 को िकया गया था, उस वƪ Ģाइम िमिनÎटर साहब ने वहाँ पर जो 
तक़री
र की थी, उसमȂ यह कहा गया था िक हम इसे इसिलए तोड़ रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक एक तो यहाँ पर 
डबल इनवेÎटमȂट होगा, मुÊकȗ से भरकर लोग आएंगे, जÇमू-कÌमीर िरयासत मȂ इनवेÎटमȂट 
करȂगे और मरकज़ी हुक ूमत भी वहाँ पर िदल खोलकर पैसा दे देगी, तािक डेवलपमȂट हो जाए। 
महोदय, उस वƪ उन्हȗने यह भी कहा था िक हमारे वे कÌ
मीरी पंिडत भाई, जो उस तूफान मȂ 
110
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

िनकल गए थे और अब मुÊक क े दूसरे शहरȗ मȂ रहते हȅ, उन्हȂ वापस वहाँ अपने-अपने िठकानȗ, 
अपने-अपने घरȗ मȂ बसाएंगे। उन्हȗने उनके  िलए यह भी कहा था, लेिकन इस सरकार ने क्या 
िकया है? इस सरकार ने यह िकया है िक उन कÌमीरी पंिडत ȗ की जो एग्ज़ाइल थी, उसको 
परमानȂट कर िदया है। जब से, यानी 2014 से बीजेपी की सरकार आई है, वहाँ पर कोई भी Ëयिƪ 
वापस बसने नहीं गया है। इसी तरह, मȅ यहाँ पर तीसरी बात कहना चाहता हूँ िक अनइÇÃलॉयमȂट 
क े िलए ऑनरेबल Ģाइम िमिनÎटर साहब ने कहा था िक हम पाँच लाख नौकिरयाँ दे दȂगे, एक 
लाख नौकिरयाँ आउट ऑफ िद गवनर्मȂट सेक्टर दे दȂगे और चार लाख नौकिरयाँ Ģाइवेट सेक्टर 
मȂ दे दȂगे। कहाँ गईं वे नौकिरयाँ, कहाँ हȅ वे नौकिरयाँ, िजनका वादा िकया था? आिर्टकल  370 को 
हटाने क े वƪ यह भी कहा गया था िक इससे िरयासत मȂ िमिलटȂसी खत्म होगी। मȅ इस हाउस से 
पूछना चाहता हूँ िक क्या वह िमिलटȂसी खत्म हो गई है? ...(Ëयवधान)
... अभी लाÎट ईयर ही 
पहलगाम का वाकया हुआ। पहलगाम क े वाकये क े बारे मȂ सबको मालूम है। िजस वƪ वह वाकया 
हुआ, उस वƪ हमारी िरयासत-ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर क े लोगȗ ने खून क े आँसू बहाये। हमने उसे 
क ं डेÇन िकया, िरयासत-ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर क े लोगȗ ने उसे क ं डेÇन िकया। िरयास
त-ए-जÇमू-
कÌमीर क े लोग हर गली, हर क ू चे, हर बाजार, हर शहर मȂ सड़कȗ पर िनकले और उसे क ं डेÇन 
िकया। लेिक
न मȅ यहाँ पर यह पूछना चाहता हूँ िक क्या वह िमिलटȂसी खत्म हो गई? आपने तो 
िमिलटȂसी को उस हद तक ...(Ëयवधान)... अभी-अभी आपने पािकÎतान क े साथ एक जंग भी 
लड़ी। मȅ यहाँ पर दूसरी बात यह कहना चाहता हूँ  िक उस जंग क े नतीजे मȂ क्या हुआ? िरयासत-
ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर क े हर एक इन्सान को अब सिÎपशन की नजर से देखा जा
ता है। इस हाउस से, 
इस सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट से मेरी गुजािरश होगी िक िजस सिÎपशन से आप िरयासत-ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर 
क े लोगȗ को देखते हȅ, वह छोड़ दीिजए
। हम िरयासत-ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर क े लोग भी मुÊक क े उतने 
ही िसिटजन्स हȅ, वही हक रखते हȅ, िजतना मुÊक क े बाकी िहÎसे क े लोग रखते हȅ। ĢीडॉिमनȂट्ली 
हमारा कÌम
ीर का रीजन इससे ज्यादा से ज्यादा मुतािÎसर हुआ है। जो हमारी आबादी है, वह 
ĢीडॉिमनȂट्ली मुिÎलम आबादी है। हमारा क ुरान व ॉयल Ȃस को क ं डेÇन करता है। हमारे क ुरान मȂ 
अÊलाह तआला फरमाता है िक कोई भी आदमी, जो बेगुनाह इन्सान का कत्ल करे, वह सारे 
इन्सानȗ का कत्ल करता है।  “ If anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder, or 
(and) to spread mischief in the land – it would be as if he killed all mankind. ” यह 
अरबी मȂ है। क ुरान मȂ िलखा है िक कोई भी िकसी िनहत्थे इन्सान का कत्ल करेगा, तो वह सारी 
इन्सािनयत का कत्ल होगा और जो कोई इन्सान िकसी क े साथ भलाई से पेश आएगा, उसे 
बचाएगा, तो वह सारी इन्सािनयत की भलाई करता है। िलहाजा मȅ यहाँ पर यह कहना चाहता हूँ 
िक िरयासत-ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर क े लोगȗ क े साथ इसके  बाद जो सुलूक हुआ, खासकर लेबरसर् क े 
साथ, Îटू डȂट्स क े साथ और जो हमारे टर्ेडसर् हȅ, उनके  साथ जो होता है, यह हाउस उसे क ं डेÇन 
करे और मेरी आपसे भी यह गुजािरश है िक इसे लेकर एक मैसेज चला जान
ा चािहए। मȅ ऑनरेबल 
होम िमिनÎटर साहब का शुिकर्या अदा कर रहा हूँ। हम उनसे िमले, मेरे तीनȗ कलीग्स यहाँ पर हȅ, 
उन्हȗने हमȂ वादा िदया था िक मȅ इसे जरूर एग्जािमन करूँगा और उन्हȗने िक
या भी। यह चीफ 
                                                            
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Arabic. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
111

िमिनÎटर साहब ने भी िकया, लेिकन िफर भी जरूरत है िक बाकी की िरयासतȗ मȂ जो दहशत 
फ ैलाई गई है, उसे िकसी-न-िकसी तरह  से तोड़ा जाए।  
सर, हमारी मिÎजदȗ की िजयो टैिंगग होती है। मुझे बताया जाए िक िकस मंिदर या िकस 
गुरुǎारे की कÌमीर मȂ िजयो टैिंगग हुई? यह िकस जमीन पर है, इसे लेकर रोज पटवारी आते हȅ, 
मिÎजदȗ क े बारे मȂ पूछते हȅ, इमामȗ से पूछते हȅ, आधार का
डर् लाइए, थाने थाने जाइए! मेरे ख्याल 
मȂ यह िकसी भी शख्स क े मजहब मȂ एक खुली मजाहमत है। मȅ चाहता हूँ, ऑनरेबल वाइस 
चेयरमैन साहब से मेरी गुजािरश है िक इस िसलिसले का नोिट
स िलया जाए।  
मȅ यहाँ पर दूसरी बात भी कहना चाहता हूँ। अभी यह सारी क ंटर्ी की नजर मȂ आया होगा 
िक वैÍणो देवी यूिनविर्सटी मȂ एडवटार्इज हुआ, वहाँ पर नीट की तरफ से एमबीबीएस Îटू डȂट्स का 
िसलेक्शन हो गया। उन्हȂ नीट ने क्वािलफाई करवाया, लेिकन उधर इत ना हंगामा हुआ िक 
यूिनविर्सटी ही बंद हो गई, मेिडकल कॉलेज भी खत्म ही हो गया। क्या ऐसा होना चािहए? हालांिक 
कÌमीर क े लोगȗ ने कभी यह नहीं कहा। अब लॉ यूिनविर्सटी पर लड़ाई शुरू हो गई, लेिकन हमने 
कभी नहीं कहा। आईआईटी जÇमू मȂ है, आईआईएम जÇमू मȂ है, एÇस जÇमू मȂ है। हम
ने कभी यह 
नहीं कहा, क्यȗिक हम सोचते हȅ, हम जानते हȅ और मानते भी हȅ िक जÇमू हो या कÌमीर हो, एक 
ही िजÎम क े दो िहÎसे हȅ, िलहाजा ऐसा नहीं होन
ा चािहए, इसे बंद िकया जाना चािहए। मȅ आपसे 
यह गुजािरश करना चाहता हूँ िक यह िकस िकÎम की डेमोकर्े सी है, िजसकी तरफ हम चलते हȅ? 
इस पर नजर रखने की जरूर त  है।  
सर, मȅ यहाँ पर जो अगली बात कहना चाहता हूँ, वह हमारे पावर Ģोजेक्ट्स क े संबंध मȂ है। 
हमारा सावलकोट Ģोजेक्ट 22000 करोड़ का है। अभी तक हमने इसका जो टोटल टैप िकया है, 
वह दो हजार क रोड़  का है और वह एनएचपीसी, सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट क े पास काफी टाइम  
से है। ...(समय की घंटी)… सर, एक-दो िमनट का समय दे दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  एनएचपीसी 
क े पास है। हम वहां पर पावर क े िलए तरसते हȅ। हमारे जो िरसोसȃज़ अनटैÃड हो, उनको 
एनएचपीसी ले ले और वहां पर भी िबजली  Ģोजेक्ट बनाए, तो बहुत अच्छा होता। आपके  पास जो 
Ģोजेक्ट्स िपछले कई सालȗ से पड़े हुए हȅ, उनको आप हमȂ वापस कर दीिजए। हमारी िरयासत का 
भी भला हो जाएगा।  
सर, मȅ ट ूिरį
म क े बारे मȂ भी कहना चाहता हूं जो िक बहुत इÇपॉटȄट िवषय है। अगर आप 
िकसी को कहȂगे िक शहर Ǜीनगर िरयासत-ए-जÇमू-कÌमीर का दारुल िखलाफा है, तो शायद 
कोई नहीं पहचानेगा, लेिकन अगर आप डल की बात करȂगे या अगर आप वाइÊड लाइफ सȂचुरी 
की बात करȂगे, तो यह सारी दुिनया क े लोग जानते हȅ िक यह िंहदुÎतान क े िकस िहÎसे का है? 
जनाब, आज डल क े सामने 3,000 कनाल जमीन ली जा रही है, जो सीआरपीएफ खरीदना 
चाहती है। उससे वÊडर् फ ेमस वाइÊड लाइफ सȂचुरी और डल का नामोिनशान खत्म हो जाएगा।   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALI
TA): Please conclude.  
112
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी चौधरी मोहÇमद रमज़ान: मȅ आपसे इंटरवȂशन चाहता हूं िक मेहरबानी करके  इसके  िलए आप 
वाज़ेह िहदायत दȂ। ...(समय की घंटी)...  
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): धन्यवाद। आपको बहुत टाइम िदया  
गया है।  ....(Ëयवधान).... 
SHRI CHOWDRY MOHAMMAD RAMZAN: Sir, I am concluding. ...(Ëयवधान)... I am just 
concluding. सर, गुलम ग र् है, पहलगाम है और इसी तरह हमारा रेिजडȂसी रोड है, ये गुलमगर् की 
लीज खत्म हो गई। वहां लोगȗ ने काफी पैसा होटलȗ मȂ इनवेÎट िकया है। अब तक भी गवनर्मȂट 
ऑफ इंिडया उसको रेगुलराइज़ नहीं कर रही है और जरूरत इस बात की है िक आप उसको ģी 
होÊड कर दȂ, चाहे रेिज
डȂसी रोड का एिरया है, चाहे गुलमगर् का एिरया है, चाहे पहलगाम का 
एिरया है, तािक लोगȗ ने जो करोड़ȗ रुपये की इन्वेÎटमȂट की है, वे उसको िफर से बढ़ाएं। मेरी 
गुजािरश है िक इसकी तरफ भी तवज्
जो दी जाए।       
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I rise to support this Budget on behalf of my 
Party. This is the ninth consecutive Unio n Budget of the hon. Finance Minister. I 
congratulate the hon. Finance Minister. My Party feels that this Budget lays a firm 
foundation for the next quarter century. We also feel that the Budget is not an 
exercise in short-term populism. It is a vision document rooted in structural reform, 
sustained capital expenditure and long-term productivity. For the eleventh 
consecutive year, public capital expendit ure has been expanded, now touching Rs. 
12.12 lakh crore, which is an unmistakable signal that this Government believes in 
building assets.  
Sir, I would like to place it on record that Tamil Nadu emerges as one of the 
best beneficiaries and central pillars of th e Union Budget 2026. The Budget explicitly 
recognized Tamil Nadu as India's strategic, industrial and economic engine. In 2026-
27 alone, Tamil Nadu Government has received Rs. 6.25 lakh crore in tax devolution 
backed by sustained grant and long-term interest-free capital assistance from the 
Centre. This is cooperative federalism in action; not in words, but in resources. I 
would say that Tamil Nadu's strength in  manufacturing, exports, skills, ports and 
technology is actively leveraged in this Budget. The announcement, especially of Rare 
Earth Corridors, linked to Rs. 7,280 crore Pe rmanent Magnet Scheme, is a strategic 
breakthrough. Tamil Nadu's monetized rich coastal sands give it a natural edge in 
reducing India's foreign dependence on critical minerals. This directly strengthens EV 
manufacturing, renewable energy, Defence production and all sectors where Tamil 
Nadu is already doing well. Similarly, I would like to say that India's Semiconductor 
Mission 2.0 allows Tamil Nadu to move beyond assembly into design materials 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
113

equipment and intellectual property. With over around 41 per cent of India's electronic 
exports originating from Tam il Nadu State, this shift up the value chain is very 
transformative. The expansion of the Electronics Components Manufacturing 
Scheme, chemical parks, hi-tech tool room s, container manufacturing and revival of 
200 legacy industrial clusters will protect exis ting jobs while creating new, high-skill 
employment across Chennai, Hosur, Coimbatore, Tiruppur, Salem and beyond. 
 Sir, I would like to thank the Governme nt for rail speed corridors for the State 
of Tamil Nadu. Ports at Chennai -- the Kamarajar  port at Ennore and V.O. 
Chidambaranar Port  at Thoothukkudi -- gained from coastal shipping incentives, 
container manufacturing, and port-led indust rialization lowering logistics costs and 
strengthening exports. 
 This Budget demonstrates deep sensitivity to Tamil Nadu’s agrarian and 
coastal realities.  The Coconut Promotion Scheme --  I would lik e to press upon is 
today’s need -- Cashew and Cocoa Mission, fisheries expansion across 500 
reservoirs and Amrit Sarovars, and export- linked incentives direct ly raise farmer and 
fisher incomes. With a 1,076 kilometres long coastline, Tamil Nadu’s fishing 
communities gain from better value chains, reduced post-harvest losses, and global 
market access.  
 To complete, Sir, this Budget truly empowers women from Lakhpati Didi 
scheme expansion. Very important, Adicha nallur has been included among nationally 
developed archaeological sites and eco-tourism at Pulicat Lake and regional medical 
tourism hubs brings global visibility to Ta mil Nadu, Tamil language, its culture and 
sustainability. With these words, I once again congratulate the hon. Finance Minister 
for her ninth Budget and I thank the Prime Minister for his unwavering vision of Viksit 
Bharat 2047.                   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWA R KALITA): Shri Randeep Singh 
Surjewala. 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला (राजÎथान): वाइस-चेयरमैन सर, आदरणीय िचदÇबरम जी कह रहे 
थे िक शायद िरफॉमर् एक्सĢेस िडरेल नहीं हुई, मȅ क ेवल उनकी एक बात से असहमत हूं। बजट की 
िरफॉमर् एक्स
Ģेस तो Ãलेटफामर् पर ही िडरेल हो गई। भारी-भरकम शÅद, बड़बोली बातȂ, शेख 
िचÊली क े दावे, असिलयत क ु छ नहीं। वही ढाक क े तीन पात। शायद इसिलए शेयर बाजार से 
इन्वेÎटसर् तक, िवदेशी िनवेशकȗ से िनजी िनवेशकȗ तक, अथर्शािÎतर्यȗ से समाजशािÎतर्यȗ तक, 
सबने इस बजट को मंबो-जंबो बजट बताया, यानी खोदा पहाड़ िनकली चुिह
या।  
114
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 वाइस-चेयरमैन सर, अगर हम बजट का आकलन करȂ, तो एक बात जरूर समझ मȂ आई। 
एक बहुत विरÍठ माननीय सदÎया जादूगरी की बात कर रही थीं िक हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी जादूगर भी 
हȅ। वे जादू करना भी जानती हȅ, यह इस बजट मȂ पहली बार पता चला, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने गांव, 
गरीब, िकसान, सामािजक न्याय, सबको जादू से बजट से गायब कर िदया। क ु छ िम
ला ही नहीं, 
जब हम तलाश कर रहे थे! यह जो बजट है, यह गांव, गरीब, िकसान और सामािजक न्याय की 
हकमारी का बजट है। इसका दूसरा नाम होना चािह
ए - कटौती बजट। इसिलए िक ऐसा लगता है 
िक गांव, गरीब, िकसान और सोशल वेलफे यर को लेकर ठहाके  लगा-लगा कर यह कहा जा रहा 
है िक सब क ु छ काट डालȂगे। एक जुमल ा  होता था टेलीिवजन का, उसी तरह से ये कह रहे हȅ िक 
सब क ु छ काट डालȂगे। यह बजट का सार है। सर, जैसे अखबार मȂ रािशफल होता है, इस बजट 
का सार है - कटौती और असमानता का रािशफल। सच्चाई यह ी है। 
 वाइस-चेयरमैन सर, िचदÇबरम साहब ने बजट क े क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर, डेिफिसट, 
जीडीपी गर्ोथ को लेकर बहुत सारी बातȂ कहीं, इसिलए मȅ उन्हȂ न दोहरा कर क ु छ और मुǈȗ पर 
आपका ध्यान आकिर्षत करूं गा।              
सर, असल मȂ यह खेत, खेती और खेितहर िवरोधी बजट है। अगर खेत-खिलहान क े 
नजिरए से देखȂ, तो िंहदी की एक पुरानी कहावत है – " ऊ ंची दुकान और जुमलȗ क े पकवान।" 
असल मȂ इस बजट का यही सार है - भारी-भरकम शÅद, न्यूज़ और टीवी हेडलाइन बनाने वाली 
घोषणा, Ģचार और Ģसार, लेिकन बजट मȂ एक फ ूटी कौड़ी भी अलॉट नहीं करते। मȅ पढ़कर चȚक 
गया और आप शायद सुनकर चȚक जाएंगे।  
सर, मȅ क ु छ उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं। माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने िपछले साल भी बजट मȂ 
भारत को food basket of the worl
d --  I am quoting  her -- बनाने वाले िकसान और क ृिष 
क्षेतर् का फÎटर् इंजन बताया था। बड़ी-बड़ी घोषणाएं की थीं। देश को यह बताया था िक cotton 
technology mission दे  रहे हȅ, mission for pulses दे रहे हȅ, mission for veget able and 
fruits दे रहे हȅ,  national mission on hybrid seeds दे  रहे हȅ। मखाना बोडर् की चचार् हुई िक 
मखाना बोडर् दे रहे हȅ। कहा गया - नमो डर्ोन दीदी दे रहे हȅ। हम भी बड़े खुश हुए िक अच्छा है, 
िकसानȗ क े िलए इतनी स
ारी चीजȂ िमल रही हȅ, लेिकन इसकी वाÎतिवकता क्या है?  
सर, Cotton Technology Mission मȂ 2025-26 क े बजट मȂ आपने 100 करोड़ रुपये की 
घोषणा की। यह अच्छी बात है, परन्तु िकतना पैसा िदया और खचर् हुआ – जीरो। यानी इन्हȗने एक 
फ ूटी कौड़ी भी सȅक्शन नह ीं की, न पैसा आवंिटत िकया और न खचर् िकया। मौजूदा बजट 2026-
27 मȂ Cotton Technology Mission को िफर से एक फ ूटी कौड़ी भी नहीं दी है।  दूसरी घोषणा की 
थी - Mission for Pulses की।  2025-26 क े बजट मȂ इसको 1,000 करोड़ रुपये िदये।  हम सब 
बड़े खुश हुए, िकसान खुश हुए, लेिकन िकतना पैसा िदया और िकतना खचर् हुआ - जीरो िदया 
और जीरो खचर् हुआ, एक फ ूटी कौड़ी नहीं दी। हमने सोचा 2026-27 मȂ दȂगे। इस बार िक
तना िदया 
- इस बार भी जीरो, एक रुपया भी नहीं िदया।  तीसर ी बड़ी घोषणा की थी - Mission for 
Vegetable and Fruits की। इसके  िलए 2025-26 मȂ  500 करोड़  रुपये िदये। सारे िकसान खुश 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
115

हुए, परन्तु घोषणा क े बाद िकतना पैसा िदया और खचर् हुआ – जीरो, एक फ ूटी कौड़ी न अलॉट 
की, न खचर् की। हमने सोचा िक शायद 2026-27 मȂ दे दȂ। इस साल फल और सिÅजयȗ क े िलए 
िकतना पैसा िदया – जीरो, िफर से एक फ ूटी कौड़ी भी अलॉट नहीं की।   
सर, इन्हȗने बहुत जोर से यह कहा िक हम hybrid seeds लाएंगे। िकसान खुश हो जाइए, 
तािलयां बजाइए, टेलीिव
जन पर िडबेट्स करवाइए। जब National Mission on Hybrid Seeds 
लेकर आए, तो हम सब ने कहा िक अच्छी बात है। 2025-26 मȂ  िक तन े पैसे की घोषणा की - 100 
करोड़ रुपये।  2025-26 मȂ िकतना पैसा िदया - जीरो, न एक पैसा िदया और न एक पैसा खचर् 
िकया। 2026-27 मȂ क्या िदया - जीरो, न एक पैसा िदया, न एक पैसा खचर् िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
सर, मेरे साथी आ गए हȅ। िबहार क े चुनाव को देखते हुए, 2025-26 मȂ मखाना बोडर् क े िलए 100 
करोड़ रुपये की घोषणा की। हम सबने Îवागत िकया िक अच्
छी बात है, परन्तु मखाना बोडर् को 
िकतना पैसा िदया? मȅ साथ मȂ वह कागज लेकर आया हूं। ...(Ëयव धान)... जीरो, मखाना बोडर् को 
भी जीरो। िकतना पैसा खचर् हुआ - जीरो। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, 1 फरवरी, 2025 को इसकी घोषणा 
की और 14 िसतंबर, 2025 तक, यानी  साढ़े 7 महीने तक मखाना बोडर् ही नहीं बनाया। 15 िसतंबर 
को जब ये पहली बार पूिर्णया गए, तब साढ़े 7 महीने बाद मख ाना बोडर् बनाने की घोषणा हुई। 
मखाना बोडर् की पहली बैठक कब हुई – साढ़ े 11 महीन े बाद, 13 िदसंबर, 2025 को और पैसा 
िदया - जीरो। तो सर, असल मȂ क्या है - जुमलȗ क े मखाने िखलाओ और वोट की खेती कटवाओ 
तथा उसके  बाद सबको £ बनाओ।  यह इनका तरीका है।  
सर, 2025-26 क े बजट मȂ भी जो बात कही और अब भी बात करते हȅ, 'नमो डर्ोन दीदी' 
की बात हुई। आपको भी 'नमो डर्ोन दीदी' से िमलवाएंगे, िंचता मत किरए। इस पर बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ 
हुईं,  676 करोड़ क े बजट की घोष णा कर डाली, खूब तािलयां िपटवाईं और अखबार मȂ खबरȂ 
छपवाईं, लेिकन िकतना पैसा िदया और िकतने डर्ोन िदए? 676 करोड़ रुपये मȂ से 576 करोड़ 
रुपये िदए ही नहीं, क ेवल 100 करोड़ रुपये आवंिटत िकए और इस देश की 70 करोड़ मिहलाओं 
को िक
तने डर्ोन िदए? चȚिकए मत। 70 करोड़  मिहलाओं को क ेवल 500 डर्ोन िदए। अखबार मȂ 
खबर िकतनी बार छपवाई? पाँच हजार बार। ये क ेवल घोषणा करȂगे, दȂगे क ु छ नहीं।  ये इनके  खुद 
क े आँकड़े हȅ।  
सर, Market Intervention Scheme and Price Support Scheme (MIS-PSS), खुद 
क ृिष मंतर्ी, िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने बार-बार कहा िक िजन फसलȗ की एमएसपी पर खरीद नहीं होती, 
उन एगर्ीकÊचर, हॉटीर्कÊचर Ģोडक्ट्स क े िलए, िकसान की उस फसल क े िलए हम Market 
Intervention Scheme लाएँगे, तािक उसकी कीमत न िगरे और िगरे तो सरकार मदद करे। यह 
बड़ी अच्छी बात है, कोई बुरी बात नहीं है। सर, 2022-23 मȂ 4,007 करोड़ रुपए का बजट था। कम 
था, पर था। उसके  बाद यह 2023-24 मȂ 4,007 करोड़ रुपए से घट कर 40 करोड़ रुपए हो गया, 
यानी एक हजार परसȂट कम। 2024-25 मȂ बजट िफर घट कर 23 करोड़  रुपए हो गया और 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
116
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

2025-26 और 2026-27 मȂ जीरो। सर, यह zero-sum सरकार है। ये घोषणा करते हȅ और िफर 
बजट का आवंटन और खचार् करते ही नहीं।   
सर, खेती क े बजट की बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ यहाँ हुईं, पर अगर 6 साल, यानी 2018-19 से 
2023-24 का बजट देिखए, मȅ आज यह आपके  माध्यम से सदन क े पटल पर रखूँगा, कागज 
लेकर आया हूँ, 1,17,000 करोड़ रुपया खेती का सरȂडर कर िदया, वापस दे िदया और 2024-25 
मȂ, क्यȗिक अभी फरवरी तक का आँकड़ा उपलÅध है, 52,685 करोड़ रुपया खचर् ही नहीं िकया, 
यानी 7 साल मȂ खेती का 1,70,000 करोड़ रुपया वािपस दे िदया, सरȂडर कर िदया। क्या िकसान 
क े Ģित आपकी यह किमटमȂट है? यह िहन्दुÎतान क े िकसान क े साथ £ है। सर, एक-एक साल 
देिखए, यह सरȂडर सरकार है। इन्हȗने खेती का बजट 2018-19 मȂ 21,043 करोड़ रुपया सरȂडर 
िकया, 2019-20 मȂ 34,518 करोड़ रुपया सरȂडर िकया, 2020-21 मȂ 23,825 करोड़ रुपया सरȂडर 
िकया, 2022-23 मȂ 19,762 करोड़ रुपया सरȂडर िकया, 2023-24 मȂ 6,545 करोड़ रुपया सरȂडर 
िकया, 2024-25 मȂ अभी तक जो खचर् नहीं िकया था, िजसके  आँकड़े उपलÅध हȅ - 52,685 करोड़ 
रुपए। 1,70,000 करोड़ रुपए खचर्ते नहीं और िकसान की बात करते हȅ! अब जो रहा-सहा बचा है, 
सर, फिर्टलाइजर मȂ इस साल िपछले साल क े मुकाबले मȂ 15,770 करोड़ रुपए काट िलए गए। 
िकसान की यूिरया की सिÅसडी मȂ 9,670 करोड़ रुपए काट िलए गए। िकसान क े जो फिर्टलाइजसर् 
हȅ - PNK, Potassium and Phosphorous, उनमȂ 6,000 करोड़ रुपए काट िलए गए। यह 
आपकी किमटमȂट है!  
सर, गर्ामीण भारत की हालत तो यह है िक 10 साल मȂ 2014-15 से लेकर 2023-24 तक, 
जो रूरल वेजेज़ हȅ अगर इंÄलेशन एडजÎट करके  देखȂ, तो एक परसȂट साल की बढ़ोतरी हुई है। 
गरीब, मजदूर खाएगा क्या और कमाएगा क्या? क्या इस बात का जवाब अब दे सकते हȅ?  
अब अमेिरका क े साथ Ëयापार समझौते मȂ तो िकसानȗ और मजदूरȗ क े िहतȗ की बिल दे दी। 
सर, समझौते की पहली बुलेट क े अंदर यह िलखा है िक अमेिरका क े खाǏ और क ृिष उत्पादȗ क े 
िलए देश का बाजार खोल िदया गया है। इसमȂ dried distillers grains हȅ, यानी processed िकया 
हुआ मक्का। इसमȂ red sorghum है, यानी लाल ज्वार। इसमȂ सोयाबीन है, सभी Ģकार क े फल हȅ, 
बादाम, अखरोट, िपÎता हȅ, कपास है। सर, क ेवल इसी साल, 2025 मȂ ही 378 िमिलयन यूएस 
डॉलर, यानी 4,000 करोड़ रुपए की अमेिरकी कपास मँगवाई गई। मंडी मȂ जाकर चेक किरए, 
वहाँ पर एमएसपी से 1,000 रुपए Ģित िंक्वटल कम पर कपास िबकी और अब जब आप तीन गुना 
कोटा बढ़ा दȂगे, तो क्या होगा? इस बात का जवाब क्या दȂगे? इस समझौते मȂ सबसे ज्यादा 
खतरनाक शÅद 'additional products' है, उसमȂ दूध आएगा, cheese आएगी, गेहूँ आएगा - 
अभी यह कोई नहीं जानता। जब fine print आएगा, तब बताएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, इसी 
समझौते की, यह कॉपी मȅ लेकर आया हूँ, छठे बुलेट मȂ यह भी िलख िदया िक non-tariff barriers 
पर िंहदुÎतान पुनिर्वचार करेगा। 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
117

5.00 P.M. 
 सर, नॉन टैिरफ बैिरयर है क्या? नॉन टैिरफ बैिरयर िकसान को िमलने वाली सिÅसडी है। आप 
िंहदुÎतान क े िकसान की सिÅसडी भी अमेिरका क े दबाव मȂ छीनना चाहते हȅ! यह सरकार 
िंहदुÎतान की संĢभुता से, िकसान की आजीिवका से समझौता कर रही है, िखलवाड़ कर रही है। 
यह शमर् की बात है। सर, वंिचत और शोिषत वगș क े िलए, खासतौर से एससी, एसटी और 
ओबीसी क े िलए भी यही पैटनर् है। शमर् की बात यह है िक िपछले साल क े मुकाबले एससी, एसटी, 
ओबीसी का बजट क ेवल 76 करोड़  रुपये बढ़ाया गया है। बात करȂगे गर
ीब की, पर उसको पैसा 
नहीं दȂगे। सर, गरीब वगș क े सोशल जिÎटस और एÇपॉवरमȂट िवभाग की हालत देिखए। वषर् 
2022-23 मȂ उसका बज ट  11,922 करोड़ का था, पर उसको वे खचर् ही नहीं करते! खचार् क ेवल 
7,420 करोड़, 38% खचार् नहीं! वषर् 2023-24 मȂ उसका बजट 12,847 करोड़ का था, िजसमȂ से 
क ेवल 9,510 करोड़ खचर् हुआ और 3,337 करोड़  खचर् नहीं िकया गया। वषर् 2024-25 मȂ 13,000 
करोड़ मȂ से 4,551 करोड़ खचर् नहीं िकया ग या। सच बात यह है िक इन तीन सालȗ मȂ 43% 
एससी, एसटी, ओबीसी का बजट इस सरकार ने खचर् ही नहीं िकया। िकसान हो या शोिषत वगर् 
हो, सबकी यही हालत है।   
सर, मȅ क ेवल यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जहाँ देखो, वहाँ क ȅची चला देते हȅ।  गर्ामीण िवकास 
का बजट 53,067 करोड़ काट िदया, शहरी िवकास का बजट 39,573 करोड़ का
ट िदया, 
सामािजक न्याय का बजट 10,000 करोड़ काट िदया, खेती का बजट 6,985 करोड़  काट िदया, 
िशक्षा का बजट 6,701 करोड़ काट िदया, ÎवाÎथ्य का बजट 3,686 करोड़ काट िदया। इसीिलए, 
आपके  बारे मȂ कहा है: 
"झूठ से ,फरेब से यारी रखो, 
बस ,बड़
बोले भाषण जारी रखो। 
बात मन की हो या बजट की कहो, 
झूठ बोलो और आवाज भारी रखो। 
वो मुकÇमल हȗ,ये जरूरी नहीं, 
बस योजनाएँ ढेर सारी रखो।" 
यह बजट गरीब, िकसान, खेत और गर्ामीण-िव
रोधी है। सर, इसमȂ फौरन दुरुÎती की 
आवÌयकता है, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                                              
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी।  
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आम बजट पर बहस हो रही 
है।  मȅ अभी माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी सुरजेवाला जी का भाषण सुन रहा था। िकसानȗ क े बारे मȂ जो £ 
उन्हȗने की है, उसकी मȅ तारीफ करता हूँ, क्यȗिक िकसानȗ क े बारे मȂ वे िजतना जानते हȅ, वह 
उनके  नेता क े यहाँ से आता है और उनके  नेता जब हिरयाणा मȂ Ģचार कर रहे  थे, तो उन्हȗने कहा 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
118
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

था िक मȅ िकसानȗ क े िहत मȂ जलेबी की फ ैक्टर्ी लगा दूँगा। जो जलेबी की फ ैक्टर्ी लगाने वाले 
आदमी हȅ, वे िकसानȗ क े बारे मȂ बात करȂ, तो मȅ उनको बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूँ। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, उन्हȗने कई कहावतȗ का Ģयोग िकया। मȅ कहावतȗ का 
ज्यादा Ģयोग नहीं करता हूँ, लेिकन एक कहावत ऐसी है, िजसको वे समझते हȅ और मȅ समझता 
हूँ।  बाकी लोग यिद नहीं समझȂ, तो मȅ िंहदी मȂ समझाने की कोिशश करूँगा।  हिरयाणा-राजÎथान 
क े लोग उसे समझते हȅ। 
"छाज बोले तो बोले, 
छालनी बोले ,िजसमȂ 70 छेद।" 
 मȅ यह इसि
लए कह रहा हूँ ,क्यȗिक इनके  टाइम पर ,जब इन्हȗने राज छोड़ा ,उस समय जो बजट 
था ,वह 17 लाख करोड़ का था और अब 53 , 47 , 3 1 5  करोड़ का बजट है ,तो िफर कटौती मȂ बजट 
कहाँ गया  ?इसिलए ये सारी बातȂ कहना िक यह कट गया ,वह कट गया ,ठीक नहीं है। वह नहीं 
कटा , वह डायरेक्ट टर्ांसफर हो गया। वह हर पंचायत क े िहसाब से , जनगणना क े िहसाब से 
डायरेक्ट सरपंच क े यहाँ टर्ांसफर होता है और वह सरकार क े पास नहीं जाता। इसि
लए , जो 
सरपंच क े पास जा रहा है ,उसमȂ बीच मȂ वह कटौती नहीं हो रही है िक उसके  पास क ेवल 15 पैसे 
पहुँच रहे हȅ। उसकी िंचता है माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, राज्य का काम क्या है? “राज्य की 
संपदा सदा धमार्य Ģयोज्
या।” राज्य की जो संपदा है, जो पैसा है, वह आम जनता क े काम आए, 
जन-कÊयाण क े काम आए, समावेशन क े का म आए और सतÞ िवकास क े िलए काम आए। इन 
तीनȗ बातȗ पर यिद हम देखȂ, तो यह बजट बहुत बिढ़या है। इस बजट की एक िवशेषता यह है िक 
माननीय Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने लगातार 9वीं बार यह बजट पेश िकया है। इसके  िलए 
हमारे शाÎतर्ȗ मȂ िलखा है: 
“नारी हÎते यदा िवǄं, नारी हÎते अथर्-संचय:।, 
तदा राÍटर्Îय सौभाग्यं, समृिǉÌच न संशय:।।” 
अथार्त, नारी क े िहत मȂ, नारी क े ǎारा यिद अथर्नीित का संचालन होता है, तो राÍटर् की 
समृिǉ होती है और राÍटर् का सौभाग्य बढ़ता है। मोदी जी ने लगातार नौ बार इन्हȂ बजट पेश करने 
का अवसर िदया, यह भारत क े राÍटर्ीय सौभाग्य का Ģतीक है। 
माननीय उप
सभाध्यक्ष महोदय, अभी-अभी कहा गया िक अमेिरका से जो समझौता हुआ, 
उसमȂ भारत क े िकसानȗ का िहत िग
रवी रख िदया गया। ये हर िवषय पर यही बात करते हȅ, 
लेिकन मȅ सदन को आपके  माध्यम से यह सूचना देना चाहता हूँ िक अभी Ĥेिंकग न्यूज़ चल रही है - 
Ëहाइट हाउस से घोषणा हुई है िक अमेिरका ने रूस से तेल लेने पर जो 25 Ģितशत पेनÊ
टी टैिरफ 
लगाया था, वह रािश वापस करेगा और लगभग 40 हज़ार करोड़ रुपये भारतीय Ëयापािरयȗ को 
लौटाए जाएंगे। यह Ëहाइट हाउस से घोषणा हुई। यह मुमिकन क ै से हुआ? यह मोदी है, तो 
मुमिकन है। इसीिलए हुआ है। ...(Ëय
वधान)... ये बार-बार टर्ंप-टर्ंप करते हȅ, अभी भी करते हȅ, तो 
मȅने उनसे एक बात कही थी िक आपको टर्ंप याद आते हȅ, लेिकन आपने हमारा टर्ंप काडर् नहीं 
देखा, और वह टर्ंप काडर् है नरेन्दर् मोदी, िजन्हȗने अमेिरका को घुटनȗ पर लाकर 18
 परसȂट करा 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
119

िदया और 25 परसȂट वापस भी ले िलया। जो समझौता हुआ है, उसमȂ न तो दूध का समझौता है, न 
cheese का समझौता है और हमारे िकसानȗ क े मसालȗ आिद क े िनयार्त पर अमेिरका मȂ ज़ीरो 
टैिरफ होगा, 18 Ģितशत भी नहीं लगेगा।  
महोदय, कोई Ëयिƪ एक साल का बजट पेश करता है, कोई पंचवषीर्य योजना बनाता है। 
जब मोदी जी आए, तो उन्
हȗने अथर्ËयवÎथा की जड़ता समाÃत करने की  
कोिशश की। ...(Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने काफी काम िकया है। महोदय, मुझे ध्यान है िक जब योजना 
आयोग होता था, तब राज्यȗ क े मुख्यमंतर्ी और मंतर्ी वहाँ दरबार लगाकर बैठते थे, उन्हȂ अपनी 
वािर्षक योज
ना मंजूर कराने क े िलए आना पड़ता था। ये बार-बार राज्यȗ की ÎवायǄता की बात 
करते हȅ, कोऑपरेिटव फ ेडरिलįम की बात करते हȅ, राज्यȗ को इतनी ÎवायǄता, Îवतंतर्ता कभी 
नहीं िमली, िजत
नी योजना आयोग को समाÃत करके  नीित आयोग बनाने से िमली है। आज राज्यȗ 
को वाÎतिवक ÎवायǄता िमली है। यह एक बहुत बड़ा संरचनात्मक पिरवतर्न है। 
समाजवादी समाज की रच ना  मȂ उलझे हुए थे और कोटा-परिमट-लाइसȂस का राज चलता 
था। दोहरी मूÊय नीित थी। हम सब जानते हȅ िक सीमȂट क े दो भाव होते थे, एक माकȃ ट मȂ और एक 
क ंटर्ोल मȂ। चीनी क े भी दो भाव होते थे। मȅ Îवयं 1980 मȂ जब पह ली बार MLA बना, तो Îकू टर भी 
दो-दो िमलते थे, उन पर भी Åलैक करना होता था। गैस का एक-एक कनेक्शन िमलता था। 
टेलीफोन का एक-एक कनेक्शन िमलता था, उनके  िलए लाइन लगी रहती थी।  आज भारत को 
िकतना चȂज कर िदया गया, उसको नहीं देख रहे हȅ।  सारा काया पलट हो गया और भारत आगे 
बढ़ा है, देश को ग्यारहव
ीं अथर्ËयवÎथा से तीसरी अथर्ËयवÎथा पर लाकर छोड़ िदया, यह बात 
इनको ध्यान मȂ नहीं आ रही है। राजÎव ĢािÃ तयाँ 28 लाख करोड़ रुपये से अिधक हȅ और 
राजकोषीय घाटे को 4.3 परसȂट तक सीिमत करके  रखा हुआ है। यह बहुत बड़ा काम है और आप 
जब यह बात करते हȅ, तो जो सावर्जिनक पूंजी Ëयय है, वह 12.2 लाख करोड़ रुपए का है। यह 
पैसा इंģाÎटर्
क्चर मȂ जाएगा। अगर 4 लाख करोड़ रुपया, िकसान सÇमान िनिध क े रूप मȂ िकसानȗ 
क े पास चला गया, तो िकसान का इससे बड़ा सÇमान क्या होगा। वह नरेन्दर् मोदी ने िकया। क ु ल 
Ëयय, Ģभावी पूंजीगत Ëयय 17 लाख, 14 हज़ार, 523 करोड़ होगा और इन संरचनाओं से ऐसी दो 
करोड़ नौकिरयां सृिजत की जाएंगी। यह बजट जो है, वह बहुआयामी बज
ट है। यह बजट 2047 
को देखकर  तैयार िकया गया है और यह 2047 को देखकर इसिलए िकया गया है िक हम आगे 
की सोचते हȅ, भावी पीढ़ी की सोचते हȅ और भारत क े भिवÍय की सोचते हȅ।  
सर, नया इनकम टैक्स का कानून आ रहा है। सारे कानून नए आ रहे हȅ। पूरे कानूनȗ की 
जड़ता मȂ सारे राÍटर् को जड़ावत हुआ है, उन सारे कानूनȗ को बदल कर आिर्थक दृिÍट से िकतने 
बड़े सुधार िकए हȅ।  जीएसटी क े जो दो संशोधन िकए, उसके  बाद मȂ लोगȗ को िकतने रुपयȗ की 
बचत हुई और िकतनी जीडीपी बढ़ी, यह काम हमने इसमȂ िकया है। मȅ आपको कहना चाहता हूं िक 
िनयार्त Ģोत्साहन और इन सब क े िलए सारा काम िकया और बहुत समझौते िकए हȅ। मȅ िकसी 
Ģधान मंतर्ी की तुलना नहीं करता, लेिकन मȅ यहां कहना चाहता हूँ िक कौन Ģधानमंतर्ी है, िजसको 
िवÌव मȂ सबसे अिधक देशȗ मȂ सबसे अिधक राÍटर्ीय सÇमान िमलȂ हȅ और वह भी उन देशȗ का 
सवȘच्च सÇमान िमला है, तो वे नरेन्दर् मोदी हȅ। कौन-से Ģधानमंतर्ी हȅ, िजन्हȗने िवÌव की सबसे 
120
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

ज्यादा संसदȗ को संबोिधत िकया है, कौन-से Ģधान मंतर्ी हȅ, िजन्हȗने सबसे ज्यादा Ëयापािरक 
समझौते िकए हȅ, वे नरेन्दर् मोदी हȅ। आप देिखए एफटीए क े अंतगर्त यूनाइटेड िंकगडम से समझौता 
िकया। 2025 मȂ 90 परसȂट टैिरफ लाइन्स पर उदारीकरण िकया। इससे टेक्सटाइल, ज्वैलरी और 
ऑटो पाट्सर् को लाभ िमलेगा, यह मोदी जी ने िकया। 18 साल तक यह सब नहीं िकया गया। 
ओमान से सीईपीए पर िदसंबर, 2025 मȂ हÎताक्षिरत िकए।  भारत की 99वȂ परसȂट चीजȗ क े िनयार्त 
पर ज़ीरो परसȂट टैक्स होगा। उस पर कोई ǹूटी नहीं होगी। टेक्सटाइल, जेÇस और इंजीिनयिंरग 
गुड्स मज़बूत हȗगे। न्यूजीलȅड से एफटीए िकया िदसंबर, 2025 मȂ िनÍकिर्षत क ृिष फल-सÅजी 
मन्युफ ैक्चिंरग को बाजार िमलेगा। Ģशांत क्षेतर् का गेटवे भी हमारे िलए खुल जाएगा। अक्टूबर, 
2025 मȂ िÎवट्जरलȅड, आइसलȅड और नॉवȃ टीईपीए हुआ। इसमȂ एक िमिलयन नौकिरयां सृिजत 
हȗगी। यूरोपीय संघ, िजसे मदर ऑफ ऑल डीÊस कहते हȅ, उसमȂ जनवरी, 2026 मȂ 27 देशȗ क े 
साथ एक-साथ समझौता हुआ। 96 Ģितशत  ईयू िनयार्त पर टैिरफ कट होगा, टैक्सटाइल फॉमार् 
ऑटो को लाभ होगा और िǎपक्षीय Ëयापार बढ़ेगा। अभी-अभी यह समझौता हुआ है। अमेिरका की 
डील क े बारे मȂ जो ये कह रहे हȅ, तो अमेिरका से डील भारत मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, चाहे सामिरक 
बात हो, चाहे Ëयापािरक बात हो, देश क े interests से समझौता नहीं कर सकता, क्यȗिक नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी का ‘तपे पूत जीवन’ राÍटर् को समिर्पत है।  जब  यूकर् े न और रूस का युǉ शुरू हुआ, तब 
अमेिरका और यूरोप ने, सबने कहा िक रूस से कर्ूड मत खरीदो, लेिकन मोदी जी ने कहा िक मȅ 
खरीदूंगा, क्यȗिक मुझे मेरे देश की ऊजार् का संरक्षण करना है। उन्हȗने तेल खरीदा और खरीदा ही 
नहीं,  बिÊक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: अभी खरीदȂगे? 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: अभी पूछ लेना, आएंगे तो। ...(Ëयवधान)... खरीद रहे हȅ। 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर (उǄर Ģदेश): खरीद रहे हȅ, आपको पता नहीं है, आप पहले पता कीिजए।  
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: कब? 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: आप पह
ले थोड़ा-सा इंतज़ार कर लीिजए, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ भी बता दूँगा। 
उन्हȗने वह खरीदा और खरीदा ही नहीं, बिÊक खरीदने क े बाद, हमारी िरफाइनरीज़ मȂ शुǉ 
करके , जो यूरोप हमसे कह रहा था िक मत खरीदो, उस यूरोप को सबसे įयादा पेटर्ोल एक्सपोटर् 
वाला देश भारत बना है। यह काम मोदी जी ने िक
या है। मोदी जी की इतनी अपील थी िक यूकर् े न 
और रूस मȂ जब भारतीय झंडा लेकर गए, तब गोलाबारी बंद हो गई। इसि लए मोदी जी का जो 
अिÎतत्व है, आप वह अिÎतत्व समिझए। अभी जो समझौता िकया है, वह समझौता भारत की शतș 
क े आधार पर हुआ है, और िकसी शतर् पर नहीं हुआ है।  
महोदय, बजट की चचार् करते समय भी ऐसा कह रहे थे िक बजट मȂ क्या बढ़ा है, बजट मȂ 
क्या हुआ है? सबसे पहली बात तो यह है िक राÍटर् रक्षा पहला काम है। हमारे शाÎतर्ȗ मȂ कहा गया 
है— “शÎतर्ेण रिक्ष
ते राÍटर्े।”  उन्हȗने रक्षा बजट को 14  परस Ȃट तक बढ़ाया है। उस पर 2 लाख, 56 
हज़ार करोड़ रुपये įयादा खचर् कर रहे हȅ। उन्हȗने रक्षा का बजट बढ़ाया है। उन्हȗने रक्षा का बजट 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
121

क्यȗ बढ़ाया है? उन्हȗने यह इसिलए बढ़ाया है, क्यȗिक िंसदूर तो हो गया है, लेिकन अब सुदशर्न 
चकर् जैसा सुरक्षा कवच बनाना है। जैसा इज़राइल ने डोम बना रखा है, भारत की सुरक्षा क े िलए 
वैसा ही सुदशर्न चकर् चािहए।   
महोदय, मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ - ये लोग सुन लȂ िक सौ गािलयाँ तक माफ होती हȅ। 
भगवान ने िशशुपाल को माफ कर िदया था, लेिकन अगर सौ से įयादा गािलयाँ होती हȅ, तो िफर 
सुदशर्न चकर् चल जाता है। कांगर्ेस वालȗ को भी समझना च ािहए िक आप Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को 
िजतनी गािलयाँ Ëयिƪगत रूप से िनकाल रहे हȅ, वह ठीक नहीं है। Ëयिƪगत रूप से गािलयाँ 
िनकालना िबÊकु ल ठीक नहीं है। आप नीित पर, िसǉांत पर आलोचना कीिजए, और आपको यह 
ही करना चािहए।  
महोदय, इसी Ģकार से मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब वह कायर् हो गय
ा, रक्षा हो गई, तब 
उसके  बाद शाÎतर् की िंचता होगी – “शÎतर्ेण रिक्षते राÍटर्े शाÎतर्िंचता Ģवतर्ते।” इस Ģकार से िशक्षा 
आ गई। इस बजट मȂ िशक्षा को बढ़ावा िदया गया है और िशक्षा क े िलए ज्यादा खचर् का Ģावधान भी 
है। इसके  बाद क ृिष क े िलए भी और Ģावधान िकया गया है, सामािजक सुरक्षा क े िलए भी Ģावधान 
िकया गया है। वह Ģावधान िकतना है? िचिकत्सा और ÎवाÎथ् य ...(समय की घंटी)… 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): आप अपना भाषण समाÃत कीिजए।  
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: मȅने शुरू िकया है, खत्म करता हूँ। मȅ एक मंतर् क े बाद खत्म  
करता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... अनपढ़ वाली बात तो हम दोनȗ जानते हȅ। यह बात सुरजेवाला जी और 
मȅ, हम दोनȗ जानते हȅ। इस बजट मȂ इस Ģकार का Ģावधान िकया गया है िक आने वाली पीिढ़याँ 
इसे याद रखȂगी। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े िलए अथवर्वेद का एक मंतर् है, मȅ वह मंतर् पढ़कर अपनी बात 
समाÃत करूँगा:  
“भदर्िमच्छन्त ऋषयः Îविर्वदÎतपोदीक्षामुप िनषेदुरगर्े। 
ततो राÍटर्ं बलमोजìच जातं तदÎमै देवा उपसंनमन्तु॥ 
अथार्त, राÍटर् उन मनुÍयȗ क े Ģित क ृतज्ञ है, जो अपने तप क े Ģभाव से राÍटर् को शिƪसंपन्न और 
गौरवाÎपद बनाते हȅ, िजनके  ओजÎवी Îवरूप को देखकर राÍटर् उनके  सामने नतमÎतक हो जाते 
हȅ,  जैसे  िक अमेिरक
ा 42 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपये देकर हो गया है। उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मुझे सदन मȂ 
अपनी बात रखने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                            
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BH UBANESWAR KALITA):  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar  
Ray – not present.  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu – not present.  Dr. Ashok Kumar 
Mittal.     
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब):  क्या ये Îपेशल मȂशन्स हȅ? 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर काि
लता): नहीं, नहीं। यह बजट पर िडबेट है।  
122
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: ठीक है, सर। सर, मेरी पाटीर् का थोड़ा टाइम बच गया था, तो उसे एड 
करने की िरक्वेÎट की थी। क ृपया उसे देख लीिजएगा। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): आपके  पास दस िमनट हȅ। 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: महोदय, पहले तो मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ िक आपने मुझे 2026-
27 क े बजट पर 140 कर
ोड़ नागिरकȗ की आवाज को इस पिवतर् सदन मȂ रखने का मौका िदया। 
महोदय, मȅ देश की इकोनॉमी और इस बजट क े ĢपोजÊस क े संदभर् मȂ जो िव रोधाभास  है, जो 
contradiction है, उसके  बारे मȂ अपनी इन पिǄयȗ क े साथ क ु छ चचार् करना चाहूँगा:  
“आपके  भाषणȗ मȂ िवकास ने छू  िलया आसमान, 
इधर महंगाई ने छीन िलया रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान। 
अगर इंिडया बन गया है चौथी सबसे बड़ ी अथर्ËयवÎथा, 
तो िकसानȗ ,नौजवानȗ की हालत क्यȗ है इतनी खÎता? 
कहते हो - फाÎटेÎट गर्ोइंग जीडीपी है हमारी, 
तो रुपये को क्यȗ लगी रोज िगरने की बीमारी है?” 
 महोदय, हम बड़े गवर् से कहते हȅ िक भारत की जीडीपी दुिनया की फाÎटेÎट गर्ोइंग 
जीडीपी 6.7 परसȂट है। यह बहुत खुशी की बात है। सर, यिद जीडीपी बिढ़या है, तो हर आम 
आदमी को इस जीडीपी का िकतना फायदा िमल रहा है? इसके  contradiction मȂ जो बात है, मȅ 
वह करूँगा। भारत क े Ģित नागिरक को तक रीबन 2,200 से 2,300 डॉलर की नेट जीडीपी इनकम 
िमलती है, वहीं नामीिबया, जो िक बहुत छोटा सा देश है, यह उसकी लगभग 2,800 डॉलर है, 
मतलब हमसे भी ज्यादा। अगर हम अģीकन देश लीिबया की बात करȂ, तो यह 7,000 डॉलर है। 
सर, हमारे आम आदमी को इसका क्य
ा फायदा हो रहा है, यह मुझे समझ नहीं आ रहा है? हम पर 
क ैिपटा जीडीपी मȂ लोअर िमडल इनकम देश मȂ आते हȅ, जो एक ĢÌन पैदा करता है। सर, सरकार 
ने तकरीबन 53 लाख क रोड़ का बजट पेश िकया। सर, रेिगÎतान मȂ जो मृगतृÍणा होती है, यह 
उसके  जैसा लगता है – दूर  से सुंदर, पास से खोखला। इस 53 लाख करोड़ मȂ से 14 लोख करोड़ 
रूपये िसफर्  पुराना Åयाज देने मȂ चले जाएंगे। िसफर्  Åयाज देने मȂ, न िक मूल देने मȂ! तो नेट बचे 39 
लाख और उस
मȂ से पȂशन िनकाल दȂ, तो बचते हȅ 35 लाख करोड़। जब हम 35 लाख करोड़ को 
अपनी 140 करोड़ जनता मȂ बांटते हȅ, तो Ģित Ëयिƪ आय िस फर्  25,000 रुपये Ģित वषर् आती है। 
मतलब जो एक Îमाटर्फोन आता है, िहÎसे मȂ उससे भी कम आता है। क्या इस 25,000 मȂ हम वÊडर् 
क्लास िशक्षा दे पाएंगे, मॉडनर् मेिडकल फ ैिसिलटी दे पाएंगे, नागिरकȗ को सुरक्षा दे पाएंगे, िबजली 
दे पाएंगे, पानी दे पाएंगे? ये बजट की contradicti
on है, िवसंगित है।  
सर,  इसके  साथ लोन्स की बात करते हȅ। इसी बजट मȂ मंतर्ी जी ने िलखा है िक भारत पर 
तकरीबन दो लाख करोड़ रुपए का लो
न है और इस बजट मȂ एिडशनल 17 लाख करोड़ का लोन 
लेने का Ģावधान कर िदया गया है। हम तो कजर् क े कालगृह मȂ ही फ ंसते जा रहे हȅ।  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
123

सर, अभी यूएसए क े साथ ģी टर्ेड एगर्ीमȂट पर बात हो रही थी। सर, यह जो ģी शÅद है, 
यह हमारे िलए है या यूएसए क े िलए है? पहले भारत मȂ यूएसए से जो चीजȂ आती थीं, जैसे 
वेिजटेबल ऑइल पर 45 परस Ȃट टैिरफ था, ऑटोमोबाइल, Äलावसर् पर 60 परसȂट था, नेचुरल 
रबर पर 70 परसȂट था, कॉफी पर 100 परसȂट था, अÊकोहल पर 150 Ģितशत था। सर, हमने यह 
सब जीरो कर िदया, उनके  िलए ģी कर िदया। उनके  िलए तो ģी हो गया, हमारे िलए क्या हुआ, 
भारत क े िल
ए क्या हुआ? भारत से जो एक्सपोटर् होता था, उनमȂ एक्सपोटर् होने वाली ज्यादातर 
वÎतुओं पर दो Ģितशत या 30 Ģितशत  टैिरफ लगता था। टर्Çप साहब ने उसे बढ़ाकर 50 Ģितशत  
कर िदया। अब उसे कम करके  18 परसȂट कर िदया और हम सेिलĤेट कर रहे हȅ। सर, मȅने बच पन 
मȂ एक मूवी देखी थी – आज का एमएलए। वह राजेश खन्ना साहब की थी। उसमȂ वे मुख्यमंतर्ी होते 
हȅ। Ĥेड वाले उनके  पास जाते हȅ और कहते हȅ, सर, हमारा रेट बढ़ा दो। जैसे, Ĥेड का रेट दो रुपये 
था, तो उन्हȗने कहा इसे तीन रुपये कर
ना है। यह उनकी िडमांड थी। मुख्यमंतर्ी क े तौर पर राजेश 
खन्ना साहब ने उसे चार रुपये रेट कर िदए और पूरे Îटेट मȂ एिजटेशन हो गया। बाद मȂ, उन्हȗने 
उसे कम करके  तीन रुपये कर िदया और दोनȗ साइड खुश हो गईं।                               
सर, वही हमारे साथ हो रहा है। पहले उन्हȗने 2 से 3 परसȂट टैिरफ को 50 Ģितशत  कर 
िदया, अब कम करके  18 Ģितशत  कर िदया और हम खुश हो रहे हȅ, सेिलĤेट कर रहे हȅ। हमारे 
िलए तो यह ģी नहीं हुआ। यह तो उनके  िलए हुआ। यह जो co
ntradiction है, यह मेरी समझ मȂ 
नहीं आ रहा है िक  इसक
ो हमारा देश क ै से झेलेगा।   
सर, तेल रूस से आएगा या नहीं आएगा, इसमȂ भी contradiction है, िवरोधाभास है। जब 
माननीय एक्सटनर्ल अफे यसर् मंतर्ी साहब से पूछा जाता है, तो वे कहते हȅ िक माननीय वािणज्य 
मंतर्ी बताएंगे। जब कल वािणज्य मंतर्ी साहब से पूछा गया, तो वे कहते हȅ िक माननीय िव
देश मंतर्ी 
बताएंगे। यह कौन बताएगा, यह बात समझ नहीं आ रही है िक हम Russia से ऑयल ले रहे हȅ या 
नहीं ले रहे हȅ। इसको ‘passing the parcel’
 खेल िकया जा रहा है। सर, 2025 मȂ गुड्स इÇपोटर् 
720 िबिलयन डॉलर का था, टर्ेड डेिफिसट तकरीबन 94 िबिलयन डॉलर का था और हमने उनको 
ज़ीरो टैिरफ दे िदया। यह हमने पूरा खोल िदया है, िजससे इÇपोटर् और बढ़ जाएगा। भारत की 
इंडÎटर्ी, भारत का िकसान और ज्यादा suffer
 करेगा। उसके  िलए क्या Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, यह 
समझ नहीं आ रहा है। सर, इसमȂ भी इतना बड़ा िवरोधाभास था।   
सर, अब मȅ रुपए की कीमत की बात करता हूं। 10 साल पहले डॉलर क े मुकाबले रुपया 
60-62 क े आसपास था, आज वह 90 रुपया हो गया।  इसमȂ 50 परसȂट rise है। िपछले 12 महीनȗ 
मȂ, मतलब एक साल मȂ ही रुपया 3.2 Ģि
तशत िफर िगर गया। इस दौरान दिक्षणी अģी का  की 
करȂसी एक साल मȂ डॉलर क े मुकाबले 12 से 15 Ģितशत मजबूत हुई है, नाइजीिरया जैसे देश की 
करȂसी यूएस डॉलर क े मुकाबले 11 Ģितशत सुधरी है और इिजÃट की करȂसी 6.7 Ģितशत सुधरी है। 
सर, मुझे यह बात कहते हुए दुख होता है िक हमारे पड़ोसी देश पािकÎतान की करȂसी भी 
तकरीबन 1 Ģितशत सुधर
ी है और हम िगर रहे हȅ।  सर, यह क ैसी िवसंगित है, यह क ैसा paradox 
है!  आप अथर्ËयवÎथा को मजबूत कह रहे हȅ और करȂसी िगरती जा रही है! 
124
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

सर, अब मȅ फॉरेन इन्वेÎटमȂट की बात करूं गा। FPI (Foreign Portfolio Investment) मȂ 
िपछले एक साल मȂ 1,42,000 करोड़ withdraw कर िलया गया है। यिद हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा 
मजबूत है, तो फॉरेन इन्वेÎटसर् को हम पर िवÌवास क्यȗ नहीं है? अगर मȅ नेट एफडीआई की बात 
करूं , तो इस
मȂ िगरावट आई है। 4-5 साल पहले, 2020-21 मȂ हमारा 44 िबिलयन डॉलर का नेट 
एफडीआई था।  अब वह नेट एफडीआई घटकर िसफर्  335 िमिलयन डॉलर रह गया। इसमȂ 96 
परसȂट की िगरावट हुई है, मतलब 100 मȂ से िसफर्  5 परसȂट बच गए हȅ। यह हमारी नेट एफडीआई 
की िसचुएशन है। यिद हम मजबूत हȅ, तो वे हम पर िवÌव
ास क्यȗ नहीं कर रहे हȅ?  
सर, अब मȅ अपने क ु छ िकसान भाइयȗ की बात करूं गा। क ृिष क्षेतर् 40 Ģितशत  रोजगार 
देता है। उसका योगदान जीडीपी मȂ घटकर िसफर्  16 Ģितशत रह गया है, मतलब हमारे िकसान 
को देश की तरक्की का िहÎसा नहीं िमल रहा है। िकसान कर् ेिड
ट काडर् लोन, जो 2021 मȂ 58,000 
करोड़ का नेगेिटव लोन था, जो देनदारी रह गई थी, वह बैड लोन अब 97,000 करोड़ का हो गया 
है। इसका मतलब यह है िक िकसान दे नहीं पा रहा है। 2015 से 2023 क े बीच मȂ तकर
ीबन 1 लाख 
िकसानȗ ने खुदकु शी की है। सर, मȅ अब पंजाब की बात करता हूं। पंजाब मȂ अभी बाढ़ आई। वहां 
हमारी 5 लाख एकड़ फसल बबार्द हो गई, 5
,000 करोड़ का नुकसान हो गया और 2,000 गांव 
Ģभािवत हो गए। हम इस बजट मȂ उÇमीद कर रहे थे िक हमȂ क ु छ िदया जाएगा। इस बजट मȂ 
पंजाब क े िलए कोई Ģावधान नहीं िकया गया है।  ...(Ëयवधान).. .  
सर, ऑपरेशन िंसदूर मȂ हमारी िडफȂ स ने बहुत बड़ा काम िकया। हमारी रक्षा सिमित की 
िसफािरश थी िक जीडीपी का 3 Ģितशत िडफȂ स को एलोके ट िकया जाए, लेिकन वह 2 Ģितशत 
ही है। िसफर्  30 परसȂट आधुिनकीकरण क े िलए बचता है। ऐसे मȂ हम क ै से मुकाबला करȂगे? इंिडयन 
एयरफोसर् क े 42 Squadron permitted हȅ, लेिकन िसफर्  31 हȅ , तो हम बाहर का मुका
बला क ै से 
करȂगे? सर, खेलȗ क े िलए िकतना बजट है - 3,200-3,300 करोड़! ओलंिपक मȂ 329 मेडÊस होते 
हȅ और यिद 3,200 करोड़ को उन 329 मेडÊस से िडवाइड करȂ, तो एक मेडल क े िलए िसफर्  10 
करोड़ रुपए एक साल क े िलए िदया गया। ...(समय की घं
टी)... सर, वहां आईपीएल मȂ उनकी 
नीलामी 10-10 करोड़ की हो जाती है और एक गेम क े िलए िसफर्  10 करोड़! सर, क्या हम इससे 
ओलंिपक क े मेडÊस जीतȂगे! Kindly, हमȂ इसको देखना चािहए। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर काि
लता): आप क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए। 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, िसफर्  एक िमनट। सर, िशक्षा का बजट भी जीडीपी क े 2.9 
Ģितशत से घटा कर 2.7 Ģितशत कर िदया गय
ा है। यह दिक्षण अģीका मȂ 6 Ģितशत है, Ĥाजील 
मȂ 5.6 Ģितशत  है और चीन-रूस मȂ 4 Ģितशत  है। सर, हम इसे क ै से करȂगे? Îकू ल एजुक ेशन मȂ 
सरकारी Îकू लȗ मȂ बच्चे कम होते जा रहे हȅ। 2022-23 मȂ इसमȂ 25 करोड़ बच्चे थे, जो 2024-25 मȂ 
24.69 करोड़ रह गए। सर, यह क ैसी िशक्षा है, हमारी क ैसी गर्ोथ है, क ैसा िवकिसत भारत है! सर, 
इसी Ģकार हेÊथ बजट मȂ उसे भी जी डीपी क े 2.26 Ģितशत से घटा कर 2.07 Ģितशत कर िदया 
गया है। हम लोगȗ को हेÊथ क ै से दȂगे!  
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): आप समाÃत कीिजए। 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
125

डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, मȅ बस एक आिखरी लाइन कहना चाहता हूं। जब हम ये सब बातȂ 
देखते हȅ, तो भारतीयȗ क े िदल मȂ क्या ख्याल आता है, वह मȅ दो पंिƪयȗ मȂ कहना चाहता हूं: 
"अब तो िदल मȂ कोई ख्व ाब  ही नहीं है, 
अब तो उÇमीद का सवाल ही नहीं है। 
अब तो नारȗ पर भी िवǚास ही नहीं है, 
अब तो अच्छे िदन आने का इंतजार ही नहीं है, 
लगता है सरकार को जनता से Ãयार ही नहीं है।" 
 बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
THE VICE-CHAI
RMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Thank you. Next speaker is 
Shri Golla Baburao; not present. Now, Shri Niranjan Bishi. 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (ODISHA): & “Sir, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to 
speak on the Union Budget 2025-26. Sir, the Union Budget 2025-26 is disappointing 
for Odisha because there is no such provis ion in the Budget for the development of 
Odisha, the development of Western Odisha, or for the development of KBK 
(Kalahandi, Balangir, Koraput). There is no  budgetary provision to solve the problem 
of migrant laborers. There is no budgeta ry provision for the development of farmers 
and agriculture. There is no provision in th e budget to double the MSP of paddy from 
₹3,100 to ₹6,200. Furthermore, in the Budget for Rural Development, there is no 
provision.  As Odisha suffers from drough ts, floods, and cyclon es, the President of 
our BJD and former Chief Minister, Shri Nav een Patnaik, has been  fighting to grant 
Special Category Status to Od isha. Our hon. former Chief Minister has also been 
demanding a special financial package for Odisha's development. Despite this, no 
additional allocation has been given to Odisha in this budget.  
Sir, regarding the development of edu cation, the Budget provision is poor; 
only 2 per cent has been given in the budgetary allocation. 93,000 Government 
schools have been closed in India, and 7, 068 Government schools have been closed 
in our State Odisha which were  there in tribal areas and ru ral areas.  Sir, if tribal 
schools are closed and tribal children ar e deprived of education, then, without 
education, tribal children will not be able to  progress.  And, how there will be "Sabka 
Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas"?  
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
126
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Sir, the health service is in the same st ate, with only a 2% budget provision; 
health services like BSKY will no longer be  available for free in Odisha. There is a 
budget provision of ₹15,422 crore for 15 crore tribals in the country, which is 0.29%, 
and for Scheduled Castes, minorities, an d persons with disabilities, it is ₹15,357 
crore, which is also only 0.3%. In such  a budget, neither the dream of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar will be realized, nor will the goals of Dharti Aba Birsa Munda be fulfilled. 
Sir, for the development of Odisha to urism—our Shri Jagannath Puri, Konark, 
Lingaraj, Chilika, Samalei temple, Harishankar, Nrusinghanath, and the 
Gandhamardan hills—there is no provisio n in the Budget for the development or 
facilities of such tourist spots. Sir, there is no budget provision in the budget for a 
High-Speed Rail Corridors for Odisha. The Bhubaneswar Metro project is not in the 
budget. There is no Budget for the construc tion of the Balangir-Nuapada new railway 
line. This Budget is only focused on Odisha's natural resources—Odisha’s 
manganese, bauxite, chromite, coal, and iron  ore. Sir, by displacing tribals, by 
displacing them from their forests and la nd, and by evicting their villages, just 
conducting mining there will not bring deve lopment to Odisha.  We need the forest. 
We don't need "mangal" at the cost of nature and its precious metals/wealth; we 
want to live with proper development. Ther e is no Budget for the PM MITRA (Seven 
Mega Integrated Textile Regions and Parks)  for us either. Sir, in our Odisha and 
Western Odisha, the best quality cotton is produced. If a PM MITRA park is 
established there, the migration of labore rs and the problem of unemployment could 
be addressed; our educated youth would get employment opportunities, and Odisha 
would develop. Sir, in the subsequent project s, there is no provision for an AI Data 
Center or a Semiconductor Ecosystem for Odisha.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Please conclude. 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI: Along with this, Sir, Odisha is a hub for medicinal herbs and 
herbal plants.  Ayurveda exists here, but there is no budget provision to establish an 
All India Institute of Ayurveda Hospital in  Odisha. For Odisha, this Budget is like a 
drop of water in the ocean. People of Odis ha say, "It’s all talk and no substance". 
Thank you, Sir. Jay BJD! Jay Birsa!”                              
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : Now, Prof. Manoj Kumar 
Jha; not present.  Dr. M. Dhanapal.   He will speak in Tamil. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
127

DR. M. DHANAPAL (Tamil Nadu) :  & Sir, thank you for giving me this opportunity to 
speak on the Budget for 2026–27. This is my  maiden speech in th is august House. I 
humbly request you, Sir, to kindly grant me a little more time to speak on this Budget. 
Before I begin my speech, I would like to start by reciting a song composed by 
Mahakavi Bharathiyar, who inspired the pe ople of this nation during the freedom 
struggle. His lines kindle the freedom spirit of this country. He says: 
This is the land where my father and mother lived happily; 
This is the land where our ancestors lived for a thousand years; 
This is the land where a thousand thoughts flourished and excelled in their minds. 
Did I not greet this land with reverence, cherishing it in my heart and blessing it with 
my words? 
Did I not salute it with “Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram”? 
At this time, when we are commemorating the 150th Birth Anniversary of Bankim 
Chandra Chatterjee, who authored the song Vande Mataram , as mentioned by the 
hon. President in her Address to the nation, I believe it is most appropriate for me to 
begin my maiden speech by invoking thes e sacred words.  Hon’ble Vice-Chairman 
Sir, in the Thirukkural, Saint Thiruvalluvar has said: 
“The king who possesses all six — army, people, resources, ministers, allies, 
and fort — is a lion among kings. ” 
Just as Thiruvalluvar states that a ru ler who possesses a brave army, patriotic 
people, food security, wealth, efficient minister s, friendly nations, and a strong fort is 
like a lion among kings, it is indeed a matter of great pride for all of us that today, 
under the able leadership of our hon. Prim e Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, 
India is being governed so effectively. In  his Cabinet, we have our hon. Finance 
Minister who has hailed from Tamil Nadu . She has presented the Union Budget for 
the ninth time. Really, it is a proud moment for all of us.  
Hon. Vice-Chairman Sir, it is also a ma tter of immense pride for us that a son 
of Tamil Nadu is serving as the hon. Vice-Pr esident of this great nation and as hon. 
Chairman of Rajya Sabha. He is presiding over this augu st House. The presence of a 
Tamilian in this exalted Chair has brought great honour and pride to the people of 
Tamil Nadu and to the State. Sir, I wa s inspired by the re volutionary leader, Puratchi 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
 
128
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran, who served as the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu 
for eleven years until his demi se. I was deeply inspired by him. I was also deeply 
inspired by the hon. revolutionary leader Puratchi Thalaivi Amma, who served as the 
Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu until her de ath and who ensured social justice by 
securing 69 per cent reservation for the State of Tamil Nadu by placing it in the Ninth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India — a le vel of reservation unparalleled in any other 
State in the country. She is appreciated as the champion of Social Justice.  It was she 
who identified me and gave me the oppo rtunity to serve as a Member of the 
Legislative Assembly. Today, while the Government of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, 
after assuming office in Tamil Nadu, has failed to take steps to abolish the NEET 
examination despite promising to do so, th e hon. revolutionary Tamil leader, Shri 
Edappadi K. Palaniswami, who served as th e Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu for four 
and a half years, took several significant me asures during his tenure. Realising that it 
was not feasible to completely abolish NEET, he introduced a 7.5 per cent reservation 
for students studying in Government sch ools in Tamil Nadu. Through this visionary 
Government Order, nearly 600 doctors are being produced every year, thereby 
sowing the seeds of true social justice. It is because of my elder brother, the 
revolutionary Tamil leader Mr. Edappadi K. Palaniswami, that I have been identified 
and given the opportunity to speak in this  a u g u s t  H o u s e  t o d a y .  A t  t h i s  m o m e n t ,  I  
consider it my bounden duty to express my heartfelt gratitude to him. 
Hon. Vice-Chairman Sir, in this House where our revolutionary leader Puratchi 
Thalaivi Amma has served, where Perarignar Anna has served, and where many such 
great leaders have rendered their invaluable service, I, a humble person belonging to 
Dalit community, have been given the privilege  to sit and serve in this august House, 
Rajya Sabha, which is revere d as the Council of States. At  this moment, I once again 
express my sincere gratitude to my elder brother, Shri Edappadi K. Palaniswami, who 
is poised to become the Chief Minister of  Tamil Nadu in 2026 and who had provided 
good governance to the State for four and a half years. 
Hon. Vice-Chairman Sir, I am coming to  the Budget now. Generally speaking, 
the Budget presented for the year 2026–27 can be described as a people-friendly 
Budget, a Budget that does not impose any additional tax burden on the common 
man, and a Budget without any new taxes.  I wholeheartedly welcome this Budget. 
No new tax has been imposed on any commodity. On the contrary, the Goods and 
Services Tax structure has been rationalised . The four slabs in the GST tax structure 
have been changed now. Those who were earlier paying 17 or 18 per cent GST are 
now paying only 5 per cent, and those who were paying more than 22 per cent are 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
129

now paying 18 per cent. The GST structure has effectively been streamlined into two 
slabs, and I wish to place on record my appreciation for this bold reform. 
Sir, reference was also made to bilate ral relationship between India and the 
United States of America.  At this juncture, when this Budget has been presented, we 
are witnessing a historic and joyous moment with the signing of the India–US trade 
agreement. Earlier, there was a steep increa se in tariffs on nearly 50 per cent of the 
goods manufactured in our country and expo rted abroad. That situation has now 
been changed, tariffs have be en rationalised and brought down to 18 per cent, and a 
mutually beneficial agreement has been signed. For this, I am duty-bound to 
commend the Union Government and our ho n. Prime Minister. People had spoken 
about economic growth. With regard to eco nomic growth, we can see that India’s 
Gross Domestic Product has grown by near ly 4.4 per cent.  I place on record my 
appreciation for this achievement.   
Sir, I would like to commend the sc heme SHE-Marts, mentioned in the 
Budget. It speaks about Self Help Entrep reneurs (SHE) Mart for rural women led 
enterprises. It aims to support women in  rural areas who have formed self-help 
groups and are facing difficulties in marketing their products. It is a welcome initiative. 
By providing them with a platform to mark et their produce, this scheme can be a 
lifeline for many women entrep reneurs. I humbly request th at this scheme be further 
strengthened and expanded so that all self-help groups which have taken bank loans, 
produced goods, but are struggling to find  markets, may be given guidance. Hon. 
Vice-Chairman Sir, many railway projects ha ve been announced in  this Budget. The 
hon. Minister of Railways has laid out a comprehensive plan. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Please conclude. 
DR. M. DHANAPAL: &Sir, this is my maiden speech. Please provide more time. If my 
time goes beyond allotted time, you can take  the time from Treasury Benches.  Sir, 
an allocation of ₹7,611 crore has been made for Tamil Nadu in the Railway Budget for 
2026–27, which is 14.99 per cent higher than last year. While some may say that this 
allocation is not sufficient, I consider it a ma tter of pride for the people of Tamil Nadu. 
The announcement of the Bullet trains and high-speed rail corridor projects, including 
the Chennai–Bengaluru and Hyderabad–Che nnai corridors, is truly commendable. 
However, I would like to place certain specific  requests before the hon. Minister of 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
 
130
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Railways. In Tamil Nadu, the railway line project from Chennai to Cuddalore, for which 
land acquisition was completed several years ago, is still pending. I request that this 
project be implemented via the East Coast Road and Mahabalipuram. Similarly, I 
request that a new railway line be created from Chengalpattu to Mamallapuram. I also 
request that the Madurai and Coimbatore Metro Rail projects be implemented at the 
earliest. Further, the Vande Bharat Express to  Nagercoil currently stops at Tambaram 
and Villupuram. Chengalpattu is an import ant junction, and I request that necessary 
steps be taken to ensure a halt at Chengalp attu also. Additionally, I request that new 
railway projects be sanctioned for th e Sriperumbudur–Guduvanchery and Avadi–
Guduvanchery corridors.  Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, I thank you once again.     
DR. MEENAKSHI JAIN (Nominated) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I thank you for giving 
me this opportunity. I rise to support the Budget 2026 of hon. Finance Minister. I am 
not an economist; but, as a historian, I we lcome certain features of the Budget. The 
importance accorded to the cultural heritage of India is noteworthy. Selection of 15 
archaeological sites, which are to be developed as cultural destinations, is an 
important step in reclaiming the cultural heri tage of this land. No less significant is the 
attention given to the development of Bu ddhist sacred sites in the North-Eastern 
Region. In addition to this tangible cultural heritage, I would like to draw attention of 
the hon. Finance Minister to the equally important intangible heritage which also 
needs protection and nurture. In particular , I would like to draw attention to the 
ancient Kshatra tradition, the spirit of valour, wh ich has existed alongside the notion 
of Brahma, the spirit of wisdom, from ancient times.  This ancient tradition survives in 
many forms even today. In Kerala, Kalari is an ancient martial tradition believed to 
have originated around 300 BCE.  According to tradition, 108 Kalaris were established 
throughout Kerala and 21 Kalari gurus were instructed in that art. Regular training was 
imparted in weapons, including spears, sw ord, shield and bow and arrow. Several 
foreign travelers wrote about Kalari, including many Portuguese and Dutch.  Barbosa, 
a Dutch explorer who visited Kerala in the 16th century, noted the extensive network of 
martial culture in Malabar. The pr actice began to decline in the 17 th century when the 
use of guns and cannon became widespread. In 1804, the British banned the practice 
because of a rebellion that had taken pla ce against them. Many Kerala Gurukuls 
however continue to teach and practice. The practice of Kalari revived in the early 20 th 
century. Besides Kerala, in Manipur, Thanga-Ta; in Tamil Nadu, Silambam; the Sikh 
associated Gatka are some of the martial tr aditions that are deeply rooted in our 
history. They combine spiritual, physical an d cultural practices.  In several parts of 
India, Akhadas also represent a school of monastic thought and martial arts. This 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
131

intangible heritage has survived through the ages despite the challenges of time. It is 
noteworthy that in December, 2025, UNESCO recognized the festival of Diwali as an 
intangible cultural heritage. We need to expand the list of our intangible heritage. The 
Finance Minister is requested to note this aspect of our civilizat ional heritage that 
needs nurture and protection. As the Govern ment is giving great protection to the 
revival of our cultural inheritance, this intangible heritage also deserves its true place.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Dr. V. Sivadasan. 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, is this on Budget?   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Yes, this is on Budget. 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I will speak tomorrow. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANES WAR KALITA): Okay, you speak 
tomorrow. Then, Shri Ramji Lal Suman. 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सर, मुझे कल क े िलए अनुमित दȂ। मȅ कल बोलूंगा। 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo, 
this is on Budget. 
Ǜी सƵाद अहमद िकचलू  ( जÇमू-कÌमीर): सर, मȅ फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा की तवज्जो 
जÇमू-कÌमीर क े मुता िÊलक़ चंद अहम मसाइल की तरफ मबज़ूल कराना चाहता हूँ, िजनका 
अज़ाला बहुत जÊद ज़रूरी है। जनाबे आला, जÇमू-कÌमीर को इस वĩत संगीन माली बोहरान का 
सामना करना पड़ रहा है। हाल ही मȂ हुई बािरशȗ और क्लाउड बÎटर् से इंसानी जानȗ का भी काफ़ी 
नुकसान हुआ है और हमारे इंģाÎटर्क्चर, रोड सेक्टर, एगर्ी
कÊचर सेक्टर और हॉिर्टकÊचर 
सेक्टर को भी बहुत įयादा नुकसान हुआ है। इस नुकसान की भरपाई बहुत ज़रूरी है, िलहाज़ा 
इसके  िलए हमȂ एक Îपेशल पैक े ज की ज़रूरत है। 
इसके  अलावा, जनाबे आला, जीपीएफ क े तहत तक़
रीबन 3,000 करोड़  रुपये और 
ठेक ेदारȗ क े भुगतान क े िलए तक़रीबन 400 करोड़ रुपये और मुलािज़मȗ क े िरटायरमȂट बेिनिफट्स 
क े िलए तक़रीबन 1,600 करोड़ रुपये अदा करना ज़रूरी है, िजसकी वजह से तरिĩक़याती 
इख़राजात बुरी तरह मुता
िÎसर हुए हȅ। िलहाज़ा मेरी यही गुज़ािरश है िक जÇमू-कÌमीर क े िलए 
ख़ुसूसी माली इमदाद फ़राहम करने की तरफ़ मोहतरमा फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा ज़रूरी 
तवज्जो दȂ। जनाबे आला, 16 वȂ फाइनȂस कमीशन की िसफ़ािरशात क े तहत जÇमू-कÌमीर को 
ख़ुसूसी िरयायत और इज़
ाफ़ी गर्ांट्स क े साथ नािफ़ज़ िकया जाए, तािक सेहत, तालीम और देही 
तरĩक़ी क े शोबȗ को तरजीहात दी जाए। इसके  अलावा, ‘ जल-जीवन िमशन’ क े तहत 
तरिĩक़याती काम फ़ ंड्स न िमलने की वजह से बुरी तरह मुतािÎ
सर हुए हȅ। ठेक ेदारȗ क े िबल ज़ेरे-
132
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

इÊतवा हȅ और कई मंसूबे ताǄुल का िशकार हȅ। िलहाज़ा ‘जल-जीवन िमशन’ क े फ़ ंड्स फ़ौरी तौर 
पर िरलीज़ िकए जाएँ। 
जनाबे आला, मुĪतिलफ़ महक़माजात जैसे जंगलात, एनएचएम, तालीम, पीएचई, देही 
तरĩक़ी, Çयुिनिसपैिलटी सपोटर्सर्  और दीगर इदारȗ मȂ आरज़ी और डेली रेटेड मुलािज़मीन अरसे 
दराज़ से अप
नी बाक़ायदा तकरूर्री क े िलए मुतालबा कर रहे हȅ। एनवाईसी क े हज़ारȗ रज़ाकाराना 
दस साल से भी įयादा अरसे से मुĪतिलफ़ महक़मȗ मȂ काम कर रहे हȅ। चूँिक जÇमू-कÌमीर एक 
वेलफे यर यू.टी. है और हमारे िरसोसȃज़ बहुत कम हȅ ...(समय की घं
टी)... िलहाज़ा इन 
मुलािज़मीन की बाक़ायदा तक़री क े िलए ख़ुसूसी इमदाद दी जाए, तािक इंसाफ़ और इंसानी 
हमददीर् क े तक़ाज़े पूरे िक ए  जा सकȂ । 
जनाबे आला, हाल ही मȂ जÇमू-कÌमीर को रेल क े ज़िरये कÌमीर से जोड़ा गया है। इस रेल 
िंलक से लोगȗ को सफ़र करने मȂ बहुत आसानी हुई है और यह एक ख़ुशआइंद बात है। हाल ही मȂ 
ऑनरेबल रेल िमिनÎटर ने राजौरी और पुंछ को रेल क े साथ जोड़ने का ऐलान िकया है। मेरी 
ऑनरेबल रेल िमिनÎटर से यही गुज़ािरश है िक चेनाब रीजन, जो िक तीन िडिÎटर्क्टȗ - रामबन, 
डोडा और िकÌत वाड़ - पर मुÌतिमल है, इस िख़Ǆे को रेल क े साथ जोड़ने का मंसूबा तैयार िकया 
जाए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): धन्यवाद, आप समाÃत कीिजए।  
Ǜी सƵाद अहमद िकचलू: मुझे उÇमीद है िक ऑनरेबल फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर और ऑनरेबल रेल 
िमिनÎटर …( Ëयवधान)… मेरी इन गुज़ािरश
ात पर ग़ौर फ़रमाते हुए जÇमू-कÌमीर को राहत 
पहुँचाने क े िलए ज़रूरी क़दम उठाएँगे। 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : Hon. Members, the 
Discussion on the Union Budget will continue tomorrow.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): Now, we are going to take 
up Special Mentions. Shriman Kanad Purkayastha.
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
Demand for resumption of Air India services from Silchar Airport 
SHRI KANAD PURKAYASTHA (Assam) : Sir, I rise to draw attention of the 
Government regarding the resumption of Air India services to and from Silchar Airport 
(IXS) in Assam. At present, Silchar Airport is served by only a single private airline. 
This has led to acute shortage  of seats, exorbitant airfares during peak periods, 
frequent overbooking and serious inconvenience to passengers. Silchar is not merely 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
133

a district headquarters. It is the principal aviation gateway to th e entire Barak Valley, 
serving three districts of southern Assa m and also catering to passengers from 
Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur and southern Nagaland. With improved infrastructure, 
expanding educational and medical institutions and rising economic activity, air traffic 
demand from this region has increased steadily. The absence of Air India services has 
reduced competition, making connectivity to major metros such as Delhi, Bengaluru, 
Chennai, Kolkata and Guwahati both difficult and prohibitively expensive. Air India, as 
the national carrier, has historically play ed a vital role in connecting remote and 
strategically important regions of the North-East with the rest of the country. 
I, therefore, earnestly urge the Government to consider the early resumption of 
Air India services to Silchar, or alternatively, the introducti on of Air India or Air India 
Express flights under suitable route ration alization. Such a step will ease passenger 
hardship, enhance regional connectivity, and advance the Government’s vision of 
inclusive development of the North-East. Thank you, Sir.                                  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Shri Kanad Purkayastha: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (K erala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha),     
Shri Sat Paul Sharma (Jammu and Kashmir) and Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar).           
Hon. Members, the Special Mention may continue beyond 6’o clock. Does the 
House have the permission to continue beyond 6.00 p.m? 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir. 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता) : धन्यवाद। Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
6.00 P.M.  
Concern over influence of online gaming 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I draw the attention of the Government to a 
recent tragic and disturbing incident repo rted in a Society in Ghaziabad, Uttar 
Pradesh, where three minor sisters aged 16, 14 and 12 died by suicide. Preliminary 
reports indicate that they were unable to overcome online digital obsession. Police 
and media sources have indicated that the si sters were deeply involved in an online 
task-based gaming application. Attempts by  their parents to restrict mobile phone 
usage allegedly resulted in increased em otional distress among the minors. This 
heartbreaking incident recalls earlier dang erous online challenges, which reportedly 
134
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

encouraged self-harm among vulnerable adolescents. While investigations are 
ongoing, the tragedy exposes serious gaps in digital safety, parental awareness and 
regulatory oversight. This is a national  wake-up call. I urge the Government to 
strengthen regulations, ensu re age verification, promote digital literacy, expand 
mental health support and integrate digital safety education in schools. The safety 
and mental well-being of our children must remain paramount.   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Dr. M. Thambidurai:  Shri R. Girirajan (T amil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), and Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra). 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal; need for a Central law to ensure accountability of 
public servants. 
Need for a central law to ensure accountability of public servants 
डा.अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब): महोदय, मȅ देश मȂ बढ़ रही Ģशासिनक संवेदनहीनता क े एक 
गंभीर मुǈे को उठाना चाहता हूँ। हाल ही मȂ हमने देखा है िक क ै से सरकारी अÎपतालȗ मȂ सुरक्षा 
मानकȗ की अनदेखी क े कारण आग लगती है और इनक्यूबेटर मȂ रखे नवजात िशशुओं की 
ददर्नाक मृत्यु हो जाती है।  इसी तर
ह, शहरȗ मȂ िसिवक अथॉिरटीज़ (Civic Authorities) की घोर 
लापरवाही क े कारण कभी सड़कȂ  धँस जाती हȅ, तो कभ ी बेसमȂट मȂ पानी भर जाने से छातर्ȗ की 
ड ूबने से मौत हो जाती है। ऐसी ǭदयिवदारक घटनाओं क े बाद भी िजÇमेदार अिधकािरयȗ पर कोई 
ठोस कारर्वाई नहीं होती; क ेवल उनका तबादला या िनलंबन कर िदया जा ता है, अतः मेरी सरकार 
से मांग है िक वह “Public Servant Accountability Act ” जैसा एक सख्त क Ȃदर्ीय कानून लाए। 
इस कानून क े तहत लापरवाही बरतने वाले अिधकािरयȗ पर आपरािधक मुकदमा दजर् हो और 
पीिड़तȗ को िदए जाने वाले मुआवज़े की वसूली दोषी अिधक ािरयȗ क े वेतन या संपिǄ से की जाए, 
िजससे Ëयिƪगत जवाबदेही बढ़ेगी और दंड का भय भी होगा। 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal:  Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr . Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), and Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu and Kashmir).  
Shri Mokariya Rambhai. He will speak in Gujarati. 
  
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
135

Demand for direct air connectivity between Porbandar to Mumbai and Delhi 
SHRI MOKARIYA RAMBHAI (Gujarat): &Sir, I draw attention of the Government to a 
critical issue concerning the development of Porbandar city. Porbandar is not merely 
a city of Gujarat, it is globally known as  the birthplace of Mahatma Gandhi and holds 
immense historical and national importance. Despite this, the city continues to remain 
deprived of adequate air connectivity. I strongly demand the commencement of 
regular air services from Porb andar to Mumbai and Delhi, two of the most important 
cities in the country. Mumbai, the financial capital, and Delhi, the national capital are 
major centres for trade, governance, education and healthcare. Direct air connectivity 
with these cities has become essential fo r the holistic development of Porbandar. 
Currently, traders, businesspersons, studen ts, working professionals and patients 
seeking advanced medical treatment are compelled to undertake long and exhausting 
journeys by road or rail. These journeys resu lt in a significant loss of time, energy and 
financial resources.  Porbandar also holds significant tourism potential, being home to 
Mahatma Gandhi’s birthplace, a scenic coas tline, ancient temples and rich cultural 
heritage. However, the lack of proper air connectivity restricts tourist inflow. Direct 
flights from Mumbai and Delhi would boos t tourism, strengthen the local economy 
and generate employment opportunities for the youth.  In today’s era, air travel is no 
longer a luxury but a necessity for developmen t. Therefore, I urge the Government of 
India to initiate regular flight services be tween Porbandar and to Mumbai and Delhi at 
the earliest, for the overall progress of Porbandar and the Saurashtra region.” 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Mokariya Rambhai:  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sat Paul Sharma (Jammu and Kashmir), Shri Niranjan 
Bishi (Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala) and Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar).   
Now, Shrimati Sulata Deo on ‘Concern over rising Cyber Fraud and Fake Call 
scams.’ 
Concern over rising Cyber Fraud and Fake Call Scams 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha): Sir, I raise a serious matter regarding the growing 
problem of cyber fraud and fake call scam s that are troubling people across the 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Gujarati. 
 
 
136
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

country and causing heavy financial losses.  Every day people are being cheated 
through fake bank and KYC calls, fraudulent links, OTP scams, UPI and credit card 
fraud, and SIM swap frauds. A new and dangerous trend of so-called “online arrest” 
is also emerging, where fraudsters pose as police or investigating officers, threaten 
people through video calls, and force them to transfer mone y. Many victims lose their 
lifetime savings within minutes. Senior ci tizens, women, students and ordinary 
citizens with limited digital knowledge are the worst affected. Victims often face 
difficulty in registering complaints, delays in freezing bank accounts and very little 
recovery of their hard-earned money. Cybe rcriminals operate fr om different States 
and even outside the country, making invest igation difficult. While digital payments 
and online services have grown rapidly, cybe r policing, trained manpower and public 
awareness have not grown at the same pace. This has left common people vulnerable 
to fraud. I urge the Government to streng then cybercrime police units, ensure quick 
registration of complaints, improve coordi nation with banks an d telecom companies, 
and speed up the process of freezing frau dulent accounts. Large-scale awareness 
campaigns in simple language are also urgently needed.                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shrimati Sulata Deo: Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),     
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan  (Maharashtra), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Bhim 
Singh (Bihar), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odish a), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Manas 
Ranjan Mangaraj (Odisha). 
Now, Dr. V. Sivadasan on ‘Need to ensure social security to workers in the 
unorganised sector’. 
Need to ensure social security to workers in the unorganised sector 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) : Sir, there is an urgent need to ensure comprehensive 
and enforceable social security for uno rganised workers, who constitute the 
backbone of India’s economy. According to official estimates, nearly 90 per cent of 
India’s workforce, over 430 million workers are employed in the unorganised sector, 
including construction workers, agricultur al labourers, domestic workers, street 
vendors, home-based workers, migrants, and gig workers. Despite their contribution 
of more than half of the national GDP, the vast majority remain outside any system of 
social protection. The Periodic Labour Forc e Survey and data indicate that less than 
10 per cent of unorganised workers have access to any form of social security benefit. 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
137

The e-Shram portal, launched to create a na tional database but registration has not 
translated into assured entitlements. Bene fits such as health insurance, old-age 
pension, maternity assistance, disab ility support, accident compensation, and 
unemployment protection remain fragmented. Allocations for social security remain 
insufficient. Migrant workers continue to face exclusion due to lack of portability, as 
exposed during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is therefore imperative that the Union 
Government should establish a rights-bas ed, adequately fund ed, and time-bound 
social security framework. There is a need to ensure that a strong social security 
network is built up, so that every worker in the unorganised sectors get sufficient 
State support for nutrition, healthcare and shelter.                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Dr. V. Sivadasan:  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bi shi (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
Now, Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham. 
Need for environmental and forest clearances for the Attappady                       
Irrigation project in Kerala 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala) : Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir, for 
giving me the opportunity. I rise to emphasize the urgent need to obtain 
environmental and forest clearances from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change for the Attappady Irrigati on Project in Kerala. This project was 
sanctioned under the Cauvery Water Disp utes Tribunal Award and conclusively 
upheld by the hon. Supreme Court in its judgment dated 16 February, 2018. Under 
this settlement, Kerala was allocated 30 TM C of Cauvery water, including 6 TMC for 
the Bhavani basin, of which 2.87 TMC is specifically earmarked for Attappady. This 
allocation constitutes a settled legal right,  not a discretionary or negotiable claim. 
Despite this legal finality, the project continues to face procedural  delays. A scientific 
Environmental Impact Assessment is requir ed for environmental clearance, which in 
turn necessitates the issuance of Terms of Reference by the Ministry. Notably, the 
Expert Appraisal Committee identified no technical or ecological impediments. 
However, the proposal was returned citing the need for inter-State clearance.  I urge 
the Ministry for the prompt issuance of the Terms of Reference and statutory 
clearances, recognising Kerala’s legal mandate to utilise its allocated share from the 
Bhavani basin, which is essential to ensu re justice and development for the drought-
138
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

prone, predominantly tribal region of Attappady, while upholding environmental 
responsibility.  Thank you.                                               
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala). 
Now, Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan.   
Need to uphold brotherhood, unity and social harmony in the society 
SHRI CHOWDRY MOHAMMAD RA MZAN (Jammu and Kashmir) : Mr. Vice-
Chairman, Sir, I draw attention of the Government to the need of preserving 
brotherhood, unity and social harmony in our country. India’s strength lies in its 
diversity and the Constitutional values of  equality, fraternity and justice. Any 
expression of hatred or discrimination against any section, caste or community 
weakens our social fabric and must be firmly discouraged. I would also like to express 
concern over reports of harassment faced  by Kashmiri students, labourers and 
traders in different parts of the country, which creates fear and insecurity among 
innocent citizens. Such incidents are disturbing and go against the spirit of national 
unity. I urge the Government to take appropriate steps to ensure their safety, promote 
harmony, and strengthen mutual respect and inclusiveness, so that every citizen feels 
secure and equally valued in our great nation. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sajjad Ahmad 
Kichloo (Jammu and Kashmir), Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Math er Hisham (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala) and Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu and Kashmir).              
Now, Dr. Fauzia Khan – Concern over im pact of air pollution on education. 
Concern over impact of air pollution on education 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir, for giving me the 
opportunity. Sir, learning is impacted when  the air children breat he harms their ability 
to think, remember, and concentrate. In our country, it is the lived reality of millions of 
[ 09 February, 2026 ]
139

children. Evidence is clear, even aone -microgram rise in PM 2.5 reduces 
mathematics performance by up to 16 per centage points and reading by nearly 9 
points. Delhi’s pollution levels are consistent ly far above safe limits, and air pollution 
steadily erodes learning outcomes. Humans do not develop an immunity to polluted 
air. Our bodies do not adapt; lungs and brains suffer cumulative damage, causing 
poorer attention, memory, and school pe rformance. Sir, cleaner air improves 
learning, proving this loss is preventa ble. Yet our policy response remains 
fragmented. The National Education Policy fa ils to address how pollution and climate 
shocks disrupt schooling itself. The National  Action Plan on Climate Change does not 
treat education as a core pillar at all. In stead, we see reactive measures -- school 
closures, early holidays, online classes -- without long-term planning. There is no 
robust data on learning losses, no continuity plans for mid-day meals, and no serious 
investment in climate-resilient school infr astructure. Without institutional clarity and 
sustained investment, learning losses will co ntinue to undermine national progress. 
Sir, I urge the Government to look into it. Thank you.   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shrimati Fauzia Khan: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Ker ala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi (Jammu and Kashmir), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala) and Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo (Jammu and Kashmir).    
Now, Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha; not present.                                   
The House stands adjourned to meet at 11  a.m. on Tuesday, the 10th February, 2026. 
The House then adjourned at sixteen minutes pastsix of the clock till eleven of  
the clock on Tuesday, the 10th February, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
140
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 